



                               TRANSIENT

                             By WARD MOORE

                         ILLUSTRATED by FINLAY

                      COMPLETE BOOK-LENGTH NOVEL

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                    Amazing Stories February 1960.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                               CHAPTER 1


The Governor, a widower in his earliest fifties, turned off the
ignition, noting with satisfaction the absence of street signs limiting
parking time. Governor Lampley, serving out the unexpired term of
his predecessor and not entirely hopeless of nomination and election
in his own right, pictured the stupid or fanatical cop who under
any circumstances would write a ticket for the car with the license
GOV-001. He and Marvin had made a big joke out of those zeros, Marvin
showing his hostility under the kidding, the Governor hiding his
dislike for his secretary under his self-deprecation.

Before getting out he dusted the knees of his trousers and looked up
and down the shabby street. The Odd Fellows Hall was built of concrete
blocks; Almon Lampley was reasonably sure it hadn't been there thirty
years before. The other buildings seemed to be as he remembered
them, if anything so fragile as the reconstruction in his mind could
be called a memory. He'd forgotten the name of the place, its very
location. Only the highway marker, the one so close it rooted the
town briefly from obscurity to pinpoint it fleetingly: so many miles
from the capital behind him, so many miles to the destination before
him, hit the chord. Why, it was here. This was the place. How very
long, long ago. Goodness (he curbed the natural profanity of even his
thoughts lest he offend some straitlaced voter), goodness--years and
years. A generation. Before he met Mattie, before he switched from
selling agricultural implements to vote-getting.

       *       *       *       *       *

And the sign just outside, Pop. 1,983. Pathetic lack of 17 more pop.
With 2,000 they could have boasted: We're on our way, on our third
thousand, the biggest little town between here and there. Watch us
grow. If you lived here, you'd be home now. Get in on the ground floor
and expand with us, Tomorrow's metropolis. Under two thousand was
stagnation, decay, surrender. 1,983: possibly a thousand registered
voters; more likely eight hundred--two precincts. How many Republicans,
how many Democrats? Maybe three screwballs: one voting Prohibition, one
writing in his own name, one casting a ballot for Pogo. A sad town, a
dead town. Surely it hadn't been so thirty years ago?

But there had been the railroad then, and young Almon Lampley swinging
down from the daycoach before the wheels stopped turning, bursting with
enthusiasm, eager, cocky, invincible. The railroad gone, its tracks
melted into scrap, its ties piled up and burned, its place taken by
trucking lines, buses, cars. You had to have progress. So what if the
town got lost in the process, fell behind? There were other towns,
equally deserving, equally promising, equally anxious to get ahead.
The state was full of them: chicory capital of the world, hub of mink
breeding, where the juiciest pickles are made, home-owners' heaven, the
friendliest city, Santa Claus' summer residence, host to the annual
girly festival, gateway to the alkali flats. Thousands of them. And
he was governor of the whole state. It would be non-feasance if not
mis-feasance in him to regret this one bypassed settlement.

Evidently progress, before it withered, had brought the Odd Fellows
Hall. No more. The false fronted stores were as he remembered--as he
thought he ought to have remembered--and the dwelling set back from
the street, forgotten or held in irascible obstinacy, petunias and
geraniums growing too lush in the overgrowned front yard. The Hay,
Grain & Feed where he had called--where he must have called--the
garage, the Chevrolet agency, the hotel.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Governor gave a final brush to his trousers, pocketed the keys, and
picked up his overnight case from the seat beside him. The hotel was
unquestionably the most prominent building on either side of the street
yet he had unconsciously left noticing it to the last. It was a square
three stories high, probably older than anything else in town, of no
identifiable style, with a sign saying glumly ROOMS, MEALS, in paint
so ancient its surface had peeled away, leaving only fossil pigment
to take the weather and continue the message. The brown clapboards
had grayed, they were parted--driven asunder--by a vertical column of
match-fencing, mincingly precise in its senility, pierced by multipaned
windows with random blue, brown, green and yellow glass. The verandah,
empty of chairs but suggestive of a place for drummers to sit with
their heels on the collapsing railing, sagged in a twisted list. The
two balconies above it had been mended with scrap lumber, unpainted,
and the repairs themselves mended again.

Governor Lampley could easily have driven another thirty, forty, fifty
miles--it was only mid-afternoon and he was not tired--to find modern
accommodations. He could have driven all the way to his destination.
He chose to stop here. As a sentimental gesture? As an uncomfortable
(fleas, lumpy beds, creaky floors) amusement? As a whim? Call it a
whim. The Governor was on an unofficial, very limited, vacation.

He admitted feeling slightly foolish as he took the three steps to
the verandah and walked over the uneasy boards to the plate-glass
doors and into the darkened, dusty lobby. In this position one didn't
give way to sudden impulse. Any yielding to sentiment was calculated,
studied, designed, to be milked for good publicity. He could see the
bored, competent photographers, the casual--well-planned--chat with the
reporters. Marvin would have arranged it all; the Governor would have
only to move gracefully through his part.

Responsibly he ought to phone Marvin, let him know he was staying here,
give his attention to whatever business Marvin would say couldn't wait
till tomorrow. In imagination he could hear the querulous, nagging
tones beneath the surface respectfulness, the barely suppressed
astonishment (what do you suppose he's up to now? a woman? a meeting
with one of the doughboys? a drunk?), the assurance Marvin would call
if anything came up. He ought to phone Marvin immediately.

The thought of Marvin made him turn and glance back through the
doorway, to reassure himself he was not part of a scheduled program
after all. But there was no car on the street save his own, no busy
technicians, no curious onlookers, no one. Only the afternoon sunlight,
the swirling motes, the faint smell of oil and dust.

As soon as he accustomed his eyes to the dimness he saw there was no
one in the lobby. An artificial palm, its raffia swathings loose as a
two year old's diaper, stood in a wooden tub. Eight chairs were placed
in neatly opposing rows, four covered in once-black leather, cracked
and split, the wrinkles worn brown, four wooden, humbly straight.
There was an air of peacefulness independent of the dark, the quiet,
the emptiness, an assertion that there was no need to hurry here, that
there was never a need to hurry here.

       *       *       *       *       *

He lifted his arm to look at his watch. The sweep-second hand was not
revolving. He put the watch to his ear; there was no tick. He wound it,
shook it; it didn't start. He slipped it off his wrist into his pocket,
and loosened his necktie.

He stood in front of the brown counter whose top was shiny with the
patina of leaning elbows. There was a bell with inverted triple
chins and outpopping pimple, an open register turned indifferently
toward him, a bank of empty pigeonholes. He picked up the chewed pen
with the splayed nib, bronze-shiny where the ink had dried on it.
He had to tip the black scumcrusty inkwell far over to moisten it.
It scratch-scratched across the top line on the page, engraving his
name but only staining the depressions here and there, mostly on the
downstrokes. Oddly, instead of the capital, he wrote down the city he
had once lived in, the city where he got his first job.

After registering he hesitated over the bell. Instead of ringing it
he picked up his bag and walked to the shadowed stairway. Up ahead he
saw a low-watt bulb staring bleakly on the wall. The area around the
globe was a grimy green, outside the magic circle the pervading dark
brown was undisturbed. The carpet under his feet was threadbare and
gritty; through his shoe-soles he felt the lumps of resistant knots in
the wood, and the nailheads raised by the wearing-down around them. He
gazed ahead.

There was a landing halfway up, opening on a narrow hall. Light came
through fogged windows set close together along one wall. The other was
papered with circus posters, the brightly lithographed elephants and
hippopotami faded almost to indiscernibility, the creases burst open
like scored chestnuts. The Governor hesitated, went on up.

At the second floor he turned left, noting how spacious this hall was
in contrast to the one below, how comparatively bright and clean.
Most of the doors were slightly ajar, not inviting perhaps, merely
indicating they were receptive to a tenant.

From the outside there was nothing to choose between them yet he felt
the choice was important. Further, it seemed to him that opening a door
would commit him; he must choose without inspection. Thoughtfully he
passed several. The one he finally entered opened on a large room with
two tall windows. Thin, brittle curtains drooped palely from the rods.
Two dressers, the high one bellying forward, the low one supporting a
tilted metal-dull mirror, were thick with cheap varnish that wept long
blob-ended tears. The double bed was made, the coverlet turned down,
the lumpy pillows smooth and gray. On a whatnot in one corner a glass
bell enclosed two wax figures, a bride and groom in wedding finery. The
wax bride was wringing her waxen hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Governor put his bag on the foot of the bed, took off his
jacket, rolled up his sleeves, went to the sink. The faucets were
black-spotted, green-flecked, with remnants of nickelplating and long
dark scratches. The basin was orange-brown and gray-white. He turned on
the HOT. There was a quick hiss and a slurp of thick, liquid rust. He
tried the COLD. The slurp was the same but there was no hiss. He looked
around the room again, saw the washstand. The knobbly-spouted pitcher
stood in the center of the knobbly-rimmed bowl. The water appeared
good despite the dust floating on top. He poured some in the basin and
rinsed his face and hands.

As a small child he had been sure water was life. Once he sprinkled
some on a dead bird, stiff and ruffled. He found a towel, hard and
grainy, dried his hands, shrinking slightly from the contact. He took
his comb from his jacket and ran it through his still thick hair, only
lightly graying. It was a minor pride that his campaign pictures were
always the latest, never one taken when he was much younger.

He became aware he was being watched and turned inquiringly toward the
door. The man standing there wore heavy work-shoes, blue denim pants,
a denim jacket buttoned to his neck. His face was dark, his straight
black hair long. His eyes slanted ever so little above his high
cheekbones. He smiled at Lampley. "Everything OK?"

"Everything OK," said Lampley. "Except the plumbing."

The man nodded thoughtfully.

"Oh, the plumbing. It went out." He gestured vaguely with his hands,
indicating leaks, stoppages, broken pipes, hopeless fittings, worn-out
heaters. "So we put in washstands."

"I see. Maybe it would have been better to have it fixed."

The other shook a doubtful head. "This was change. Advance.
Improvement. Maybe next we'll put a well in every room, with a rope
and bucket reaching straight down. Plop! And then rrrrr, up she comes
full and slopping over. Or artesians with the water bubbling up like a
billiard ball on the end of a cue. That would be hard to beat, ay? Or
perhaps wooden pipes from the rain gutters."

"I see," said Lampley. The plans didn't seem unreasonable. "You're the
clerk?" he asked politely.

"Clerk is good as any. Everyone has lots to do."

"That's right. Well, thanks."

"Don't mention it."

Lampley rolled down his sleeves, refastened his cufflinks, put his
jacket back on. "Can I get something to eat here?"

"Why not? Come on."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Governor followed him into the hall, closing the door. He thought
briefly of asking about telephoning since there was no phone in his
room. Still it wasn't really necessary; Marvin could take care of
everything. The clerk led him, not to the stairs he had come up, but in
the opposite direction. Some of the partially open doors were painted
in vivid colors and marked with symbols strange to Lampley.

The backstairs were narrower, steeper, darker; the Governor had a
constant fear of overestimating the width of the treads and placing a
searching foot upon insubstantial air. They came to the halfway landing
but instead of the windowed hall with the circus posters, they entered
a low room, low as a ship's cabin compressed between decks. Exposed
beams held up the ceiling. A long plank table ran between two benches,
a high ladderback chair at the head and foot. One of the benches was
built into the battened wall.

On it a man with an infantile face and bulging forehead under coarse
black hair crouched over the table guarding his food with tiny kangaroo
arms. A stained and spotted napkin was tied around his neck like a bib.
He slobbered and gurgled over a bowl of thick porridge, smearing it
around his mouth, spilling on the napkin as he scooped the mess from
the bowl.

At the head of the table an old man, white-haired, hook-nosed, chewed
silently. On the outside bench was a middle-aged woman with sagging,
placid features, and a girl in her teens. All looked Indian or Mexican
except the idiot, none paid attention to their arrival.

The clerk sat down at the foot of the table. Lampley saw there was
no place for him except on the bench next to the defective. He edged
his way in, staying far as possible from him. The room was suddenly
oppressive; he had the notion they must be near a furnace, a boiler,
a dynamo. He took out his carefully folded handkerchief and wiped his
forehead. The old man glanced at him sympathetically.

The young girl reached under the table and came up with a bright
green crepe paper party favor. She extended it diffidently toward the
Governor. Smiling, he took hold of the stiff cardboard strip inside the
ruffle with his thumb and forefinger. She giggled, holding the other
end; they pulled. The cracker popped, a red tissue paper phrygian cap
fell out. She clapped her hands and motioned him to put it on. Slightly
embarrassed, he complied.

She searched through the torn favor for the motto, unfolded it. She
shook her head and handed it to him. He read, AN UNOPENED BOOK HAS NO
PRINTING. She put a bowl of beans, cut-up chicken, and rice before him.
"Thank you," he said.

"For nothing," she responded, shyly polite. Her young breasts pushed
out against her white shirt. Her dark eyes looked into his before her
long lashes fell. Her mouth was wide and supple. Lampley realized
she was beautiful. He thought with pain of walking with her through
knee-high grass and lying beside her under spreading trees.

He spooned up some of the food; it was overcooked and tasteless. It
didn't matter. Between spoonfuls he looked furtively at the woman--he
dared not let his eyes return to the girl--and thought he saw a
resemblance to.... To whom? The face was pleasant, ordinary, memorable
neither for charm nor repulsiveness. It was a matter of professional
pride, an occupational necessity for him to remember faces; he could
not recall this one. It nagged at the back of his mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

The old man rose, wiping his mouth with the back of his hand, bowing
clumsily toward the Governor. He pulled a wrinkled pack of cigarettes
from his shirt pocket and extended it. "Thanks," acknowledged Lampley,
"I don't use them." The old man shook his head, tipped the pack to
his mouth, replaced it, lit the cigarette with a match struck on the
seat of his trousers. His fingers were thick and twisted; they still
appeared capable of delicate manipulation.

The clerk pushed back his chair. "We might put self-service in here,"
he remarked to no one in particular. "Individual stoves, maybe
mechanized farms or hydroponic tanks." He belched, holding his hand
diffidently before his mouth.

Lampley emptied his bowl. The girl looked questioningly at him. "No
more," he said. "Thank you."

She smiled at him, followed the clerk and the old man from the room; he
was alone with the woman and the idiot. He wanted to get up and go too;
something held him. "A long time," said the woman gently.

He knew what she meant; he refused to accept understanding. "I'm sorry."

"Since you were here. You forgot?"

There was coldness in his stomach. "No ... not exactly. I'm sorry."

She shrugged. Her arms and shoulders were rounded and graceful but
their grace did not obscure the fact that she was old as he, or nearly.
Why was it so reprehensible to long for freshness and beauty in women
but the stamp of taste to want these qualities in anything else? "I'm
sorry," he said for the third time, aware of the phrase's futility.

She smiled, showing a gold tooth. The others were white but uneven.
"For nothing," she echoed the girl. "What is there to be sorry for?"

His eyes went from the creature on the bench to her and back again.

"Yours," she said calmly.

He had known, but knowing and knowing were different things.
"Impossible!"

She showed the gold tooth again. "Why impossible? You make love, you
have babies."

"But--like that?"

"Does everything have to be perfect for you?"

He regarded her with greater horror than he had his--his son. A beast,
an animal, giving birth to beasts and animals. "Not perfect. But
not ... this."

She laughed and moved around the table to the unfortunate. She untied
the napkin and tenderly wiped his vacant face and the undeveloped
hands. She kissed him passionately on the forehead. "You think it is
possible to love only perfection? You couldn't love one like this, or
an old woman, or a corpse?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lampley ran from the room, past a curtained entrance, and stumbled
through a hall lit with yellow, grease-filmed light. The hall smelled
of food, acrid, sickening. There was a swinging door at the end,
padded, outlined with brass nails. Many were missing, their absence
commemorated by the dark outline of where they had been. He pushed
through it.

The kitchen was oddly constructed. Its ceiling seemed to be two
stories high; just under it were niches for sooty plaster figures, all
horribly distorted, figures with one arm twice the length of the other,
phalluses long as legs, monstrous heads, steatopygian buttocks, goiters
resting on sagittarian knees. Through a rose window yellow-pink beams
streamed to the flagged floor. Scrubbed and sanded butchers' blocks
splattered with gobs of fat, drying entrails, scabs of hard blood stood
against the wall. Gleaming knives and cleavers were racked in the sides
of the blocks. Tomb-like ranges were hooded in a row; opposite them
empty spits turned before cold, blackened fireplaces.

The old man was seated on a stool before a slanting table, methodically
chopping onions in a wooden bowl. He turned his head. "She gave you a
hard time, hay?"

Blackmail, extortion, exposure, disgrace. "I don't know."

The old man wrinkled his forehead. The peculiar light made the creases
unnaturally deep, like well-healed scars. "Who does know?" He laid down
his cleaver. "Come."

Will-less, the Governor followed. The old man had a limp, formerly
unnoticed. They went past the ranges to a massive steel door with a
red lamp beside it. The old man lifted the tight latch. Lampley noted
a safety device preventing the door from fully closing except from the
outside.

They were in a large refrigerator. Sides of beef, barred red and pale,
hung from hooks. Whole sheep and pigs, encased in stiff, unarmoring
fat, thrust dead forefeet toward the unattainable sawdust-covered
floor. Barrels of pickling brine, boxes of fish and seafood (the
lobsters waving feelers uncertainly) were arranged neatly. It was cold;
the Governor shivered. Plucked fowl dangled in rows. Beyond them wild
ducks and geese, still sadly feathered, were suspended in bunches,
three ducks, two geese to a bunch. The Governor touched a mallard's
breast as he passed; the down was strangely warm in this chilling
place.

They crossed an empty space. The whole carcass of an animal hung from
gray hooks curving through the tendons of its legs. It had been skinned
and gutted but the head was intact and untouched. The shaggy hair
drooped forward, the horns pointed at nothing. The glazed eyes absorbed
the light, the tongue, clenched between dead teeth, protruded.

"Buffalo," cried the Governor. "Surely it's against the law to kill
them?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The old man ran his dark, heavily veined hand gloatingly over the
bison's hump and down the shoulder. "Tasty. Very tasty."

"You can't do things like this," insisted the Governor.

"Ah," sighed the old man. "Boom boom."

Lampley came closer. There were no signs of the buffalo having been
shot. Its throat was cut and dark blood had congealed around the jagged
wound. The old man picked out several clots of dried blood and put them
in his mouth, sucking appreciatively. He rubbed his cheek against the
head of the animal. "Soft," he said. "See yourself."

The Governor drew back.

The old man stared contemptuously at him. "No wonder."

"How do I get out of here?" asked Lampley.

The old man gestured indifferently. "Try that way." He waved his arm.

Lampley turned. Either the refrigerator had gotten colder or he was
newly vulnerable to the chill. He shivered; hoarfrost crunched under
his feet, the wall glistened with ice crystals. He realized he was not
retracing his steps when he passed braces of partridges--or had he
merely not noticed them before?--grouse, pheasants. He looked back; the
old man was still nuzzling the bison head.

He came to a mound of snow and was puzzled, less at its presence
than at its use and origin. Who would manufacture snow, and for what
purpose? And if not manufactured it must have been brought a long way
at great expense for it did not snow in this part of the state more
than once in a dozen years.

But it was not a simple mound after all but an igloo, crudely
constructed, as though by a child. Impulsively he got down on his knees
and crawled through the entrance-tunnel until his head was inside. It
was warm under the dome, warm and soothing and safe. He backed out
quickly, frightened at the thought of becoming too content there, of
not being able to leave its comfort.

The cold of the refrigerator was accentuated by the contrast; his
breath came in steamy puffs. He hurried to a door opening from the
inside. He leaned against the wall of a dark corridor and breathed
deeply. The picture of the old man fondling the buffalo head was still
before him. He felt his way slowly along the wall, and then he was in
the lobby again. There was something wrong here: the room where they
had eaten had been a half level higher.

There was no point in wondering over the layout of the hotel. He would
retrieve his bag, get in the car and go on to his destination. He
stumbled through the gloom, missing the stairs, and saw he was in front
of an antique elevator, the doors open, the ancient basketwork cage an
inch or two below the floor.

"Get in," invited the clerk, "I'll take you."

Lampley entered, panting a little, smoothing his tie with his palm.
"Thank you."

The clerk pulled the grill shut; there was no door on the elevator
itself. "Ninety-three million miles to the sun," he said. "We'd fry
before we got there."

The Governor considered the idea. "Explode from lack of pressure,
asphyxiate from lack of air first."

The clerk looked at him curiously. "We could shut our eyes and hold our
breath, you know."

Lampley did not answer.

"All right." The clerk grasped the control lever. The cage fell with
sickening velocity.




                               CHAPTER 2


Lampley knew something had broken but his fear was not absolute. He
bent his knees (go limp: drunks and babies were less liable to injury
than the stiffly erect); the drop would not be fatal, he might not
even break a leg. How far to the basement? Twenty feet at most. If
he just relaxed--or jumped to the top of the cage and clung to the
fretwork?--he would not be hurt. He must not be hurt; the implications
of the headlines would destroy him.

The elevator dived in darkness, far further than any conceivable
excavation beneath the hotel. It fell through night, blacker and more
terrifying than any moonless, starless reality. It plunged into total,
unrelieved absence of light, a devastation to the senses, a mockery to
the eyes.

Then, subtly, there was a difference. The blackness was still black but
now it could be seen and valued. It was blackness, not blindness. Then
increasingly there was a faint diminution of the darkness itself, and
the shaft changed from sable to the deepest gray.

After they had fallen still further Lampley saw the shaft was lined
with porcelain tiles, yellowed with neglect. Could it be they were no
longer falling at all, just descending normally? To where?

They flashed past doors, cavernous rectangles in the shiny wall. Shiny?
Yes, the tiles were brighter, cleaner, whiter. The cage slowed, came
to a bouncing halt. The repressed fear surged through Lampley, making
his feet and ankles weak and helpless. The clerk slid the door open
smartly, with a sharp click.

"What's here?" asked the Governor, conscious of the inadequacy of the
question.

"Odds," replied the clerk. "Odds. No ends to speak of but plenty of
odds."

He half led, half pushed Lampley out of the elevator. They were in a
great chamber, so far stretching that though it was adequately lit
the defining walls were lost, far, far off. So close to each other
that they almost touched, grand pianos with their lids thrown back
and strings exposed, stood, rank after rank. From the ceiling long
stalactites dripped on the pianos: plink plink, plink plink, plink
plunk! A thousand pianotuners might have been at work simultaneously.

"Nobody here," said the clerk. "All right." He turned swiftly back into
the elevator, slamming the door.

"Wait!" cried Lampley in panic. "Wait for me." He heard the softly
whirring mechanism as the elevator started, leaving him alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lampley pounded the door with his fists. He shouted for the clerk to
come back, not to desert him. He kicked the door. He screamed. Plink
plink, plink plink, plink plunk.

He could die down here. He could die down here and no one would ever
know it. He dared not go away from the elevator shaft--he might never
find it again. He dared not stay--the clerk might not return until he
was dead and the flesh rotted from his skeleton.

Plink plink. No, long before he died he would be raving mad. Plink
plink. "Give us a tune at least," he pleaded. His voice produced no
echo. No echo at all. Plink plunk.

Calm, almost ease, succeeded panic. He walked between the rows of
pianos. They could not stretch to infinity, he reasoned, there must be
an end to them somewhere. But reason also argued the pianos couldn't
be here at all, there couldn't be seven or seventeen or seventy
sub-basements beneath the hotel. Once an impossibility happened there
was no limit to the impossibilities to follow.

He had been six when Miss Brewster came to give him piano lessons. And
is this our little Paderooski she asked so brightly. Do-do. C natural.
Treble clef, bass clef. Above the staff, below the staff. She smacked
his hands when Mother wasn't looking. He kicked Miss Brewster's shins.
After a while the lessons stopped.

       *       *       *       *       *

A unicorn pranced out from between the pianos. His coat was white
and sleek, his mane and tail shone like coal, his eyes were blue as
sapphires. The long spiralling horn was pale gold, glistening bright.
The Governor tried to approach him, to stroke the soft nose, to clutch
the heavy mane. The unicorn stamped a nervous hoof and circled away,
always barely out of reach. Lampley followed him down the long aisle
between the pianos.

The unicorn looked back, his nostrils wide. Lampley put out his hand,
almost touched him. The animal snorted, broke into a trot, a gallop.
Its hooves pounded the hard floor: tata-rumpp, tata-rumpp, t-rump
t-rump. The Governor ran too, shouting, calling. His lungs were sawed
by jagged breaths, his heart burst through his ribs and left only a
helpless, pounding pain behind. He wanted to stop, to give up, to
faint; he kept on pursuing.

The unicorn paused, wary. He stamped a hoof, tossed his mane, pointed
his horn. Lampley, gasping, was hardly able to totter forward. He took
a step, two, leaned against the nearest piano. Plink, plink, plink,
plink, plink plunk. The unicorn suddenly ran his horn into one of the
instruments, withdrawing it to leave a splintered hole in the wood.
A man came out of the shadows with a sledgehammer over his shoulder.
He was a dwarf, naked to the waist, with writhing biceps, wearing a
grease-matted brimless cap over thick curly hair. The growth on his
chest curled also, an obscene felt. He swung the hammer down on the
piano, smashing in the top, caving in one of the legs.

"What are you doing?" demanded Lampley before he realized he didn't
care what the man was doing. "How do you get out of here?" he amended.

The dwarf went on methodically wrecking the piano. The unicorn
disappeared, the sound of its hooves growing fainter and fainter.
Lampley approached the dwarf, ready to clutch his shoulder, to extort a
way out. He was afraid. Afraid of the blunt, lethal hammer, afraid of
the strength and rage which had reduced the piano to junk. Afraid of
the answer to his question. Afraid there might be no answer.

The dwarf slung the maul back on his shoulder and walked away. The
Governor wept. There was no strength in his arms or legs. He fell down
and crawled weakly forward, sobbing and retching, the sour taste of
vomit in his mouth. Plink plink, plink plink, plink plunk. Destruction
of the offending piano made not the slightest difference in the
cacophony.

       *       *       *       *       *

The weight of all the floors above him, the overwhelmingly massive
structure of steel and stone reaching to the surface, bowed him down
in lonely, strangling terror. What mind, what mathematical faculty
could estimate the thousands, the hundreds of thousands, the millions
of crushing tons overhead, malign, implacable, waiting? He closed his
eyes, moved his arms and legs convulsively. It was more than he could
bear.

He was at the elevator again. If he could pry the door open perhaps he
could climb the cables or brace himself between the rails on which the
counter-weights slid and inch his way upward. Or fall to destruction.
He knew he could never get the door open. He was condemned to stay amid
the pianos. He sobbed hopelessly.

Without belief he heard the sound of the machinery and the tip-tip-tip
of the halting car. It was the young girl who opened the door and
helped him in. She took a handkerchief, soft as fog, delicate as a
petal, smelling of herself, and wiped his tears. She held his head
between her breasts and he breathed in the scent of her untouched body.
She pressed his wrists with her fingers. She put her hands under his
arms and guided him against the wall of the cage.

"Thank you," he cried. "Oh thank you, thank you." He felt he was about
to weep again, tears of shame and weakness. He held her tightly to
reassure himself of the reality of the rescue, greedy for her gentle
soothing. "Why did he do it? Tell me, why did he leave me down here?"

"Oh," she said, as though disappointed. "You want answers."

He shrank from her disapproval. "No, no. Please. I'm satisfied to be
out of there."

She shut the door. The elevator shot upward, past the glistening white
tiles, past the yellow ones, past the area of light. It rose--more
slowly it seemed--through the darkness. The creak of machinery
increased, as though illumination were a lubricant and the deprived
dark full of grit.

His heart was full of reverence and gratitude for her rescue, for her
purity. He was bowed down by the simple fact of being alone with her
in the cage. They passed the open grillwork of the first floor and
ascended at snails' pace--no doubt now--to the second. She stopped the
car, and taking his hand, led him out. He was thankful beyond counting
when she took him to the bedroom, shutting the door behind them, and
helped him out of his jacket. She wet a towel in the pitcher and bathed
his face.

"You are very lovely," he said humbly. "As lovely as you are kind."

       *       *       *       *       *

She took the paper cap from his head and smoothed his hair. If he
had been humble, now he was humiliated beyond endurance. All that
suffering, all that torture and anguish--with an absurd gaud perched
atop him. It was beyond bearing. Fear and gratitude had not deprived
him of all final dignity; the picture of the tissue paper cap jaunty
upon him was too ridiculous for contemplation.

She smiled at him, magically healing his pride. Her mouth was a flower
cut in soft pink stone. Her mouth was a velvet hope. Her mouth was
red satin. She bent and touched him with it. He held his breath, felt
himself tremble and die.

He kissed her, delicately, very delicately at first, savoring the soft,
soft lips. He was dedicated to keeping her undefiled. He put his
arms around her, touched his tongue-tip to her eyelids, her ears. He
found her mouth again, pressed it tenderly. Then fiercely, lustfully,
devouringly. She did not draw back. He lifted her shirt, intoxicating
himself upon her small, perfect breasts.

"You will not hurt me?" she pleaded. "No man has been with me before."

He swore to himself he would not hurt her; it was not in him to be
anything but loving. He would be wise, kind, compassionate; he would
sacrifice his burning lust to her timidity. He would deflower her
without rage.

He seized her, and seeing panic struggling against the consent in her
eyes, ravished her brutally, violated her without thought of anything
but his own triumph. Crying and reproaching himself, he begged her
forgiveness. When she gave it, so readily, so understandingly, he
repeated the act as heedlessly.

Remorse-stricken, he pressed his face against her knees, smoothed her
long hair, kissed her temples, touched her body pleadingly. She smiled
up at him, wound her arms around his so that their hands came together,
palm to palm.

His penitence dissolved slowly in her grace. He remembered the creature
downstairs--his son. "Are you her daughter?" he asked harshly.

She seemed to know whom he meant. "She is my sister."

"And the clerk?"

"The clerk?" She shook her head in incomprehension. She shut her eyes,
breathing evenly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Without disengaging himself from her he raised his head to look around.
This was not his room. The furniture was similar, but the washstand was
where the highboy had been, the highboy in the bureau's place. And the
figures under the glass bell, the two dressed in black and white, were
not the wedding couple but two duelists, crossing swords. Their faces
were alike: father and son, older and younger brother, the same man at
different periods. The older had got under the younger's guard and was
pressing his advantage.

He should have phoned Mattie ... no, Mattie was dead, the doctor
shaking his enlightened head. The prognosis is always unfavorable
unless we get it early ... vulnerable womb.... He should have
phoned Marvin. It had been irresponsible of him to take this trip
all by himself, impulsively, secretively, as though he were hiding
something--he who could afford to have nothing to hide. And it had been
doubly foolish to take this unusual, little-traveled route, to stop on
whim at this obscure place.

He put his head down next to the girl's, feeling the comfort of her
flesh against his body. He was not sleepy, no longer tired. She
had refreshed and renewed him. He raised his head to look at her
loveliness again.

The long hair was lusterless, streaked with gray. The smooth, fresh
cheeks had relaxed into fatty lumps, coarse and raddled. The slack
mouth turned downward, the flesh of her throat was loose and crepey. He
pulled back in horror and saw that the tight, round breasts were long
and flaccid, the flat belly soft and puffy, the slender arms and legs
heavy and mottled.

Her eyes opened and looked dully into his. "What did you expect?" she
asked.

He stood trembling by the side of the bed. "Only a little while ago...."

Her lips parted to show yellow teeth with gaps between. "There is no
time here," she said and went back to sleep.

He did not look at her again, equally fearful of confirming or denying.
Instead he picked up her clothes and scrutinized them as though they
would reveal the truth. They were only the remembered white shirt and
dark skirt, the small, narrow sandals, the flimsy scrap of underwear.
By sight and scent they belonged to the girl who had brought him here,
not to the woman on the bed.

He dressed with his back to her. The paper cap was on the floor where
she had dropped it; he did not pick it up. He tip-toed out, avoiding
noise, though the woman save no sign of waking. He searched for his
own room but none of the doors he opened showed the identifying
arrangement of furniture or the wax figures of the wedding couple. He
could not have confused the floor: he had climbed one flight from the
lobby and the girl had taken the elevator only the same distance. If
the elevator and the stairs were on different sides of the hotel...?
That would account for the muddle.

The hall turned a corner. Instead of more doors it was blocked to its
full width by a stairway. He took it in preference to retracing his
steps; logically there would be a matching one back to the second floor
further along.

Now the carpet under his feet was thick and soft instead of thin and
sleazy. Strong bright light shone down from the floor above, showing
walls panelled in pale wood, clean and elegant. It was a fleeting
puzzle that this stairway should contrast so strongly--should have been
preserved so carefully--with the rest of the hotel.

The sound of many voices, the clatter and movement of people came
to him distantly. He reached the top. The third floor was decorated
in pinks and grays: pink walls and ceiling, gray carpets, doors
and woodwork. Couches and sofas occupied the wall-space not cut by
doors. On the nearest one was sprawled an oversize ragdoll onto which
pendulous blue breasts had been carelessly sewn.

The hall was a large quadrangle with a square well in the center,
guarded by a heavy wrought iron railing. The Governor rested his arms
on the rail and gazed down at a concourse thronged with people. Women
in sequined evening gowns, men in gaudy uniforms, gathered in knots,
moved briskly, or sat idly on chairs and benches. A few of the women
wore vivid strips of silk around their thighs or as skirts, the exposed
parts of their bodies tattooed in blues and reds. A bearded man with
shaggy hair had the skin of an animal caught over one shoulder. He saw
a girl in hoopskirts, another in ruff and farthingale, but most wore
the "formals" of his young manhood.

       *       *       *       *       *

He had no feeling that this was a masquerade, a costume party: all wore
their clothes with the assurance of habit, without self-consciousness
or interest in the garb of others. Even at this distance he recognized
a man in the green uniform of the United States Dragoons, obsolete
since the 1840's, another in the white greatcoat of royal France. A
Californio, silver pesoed trousers and all, talked earnestly with
his companion in the dropped-waist sack of the Coolidge era while a
hobble-skirted eavesdropper hovered close.

The throng was so tightly pressed together that Lampley did not at
first make out the rococo fountain in the center. A sudden movement,
a concerted parting, revealed its marble nymphs and cherubs spouting
water in scatological attitudes. A sailor, wearing the characteristic
British dickey, climbed to embrace one of the statues. He fell into the
basin and was pulled out by an Attic shepherdess.

The Governor longed to join them, to dissolve his desires and
disappointments in their gaiety and laughter. He knew there was no hope
of happiness with them, as he knew there was no way for him to get down
to them, but the knowledge did not quench his yearning.

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned away and began circling the quadrangle. The doors on his
right were all shut, no sound came from behind them. They were not
consecutively numbered, nor in any conceivable order, not even in the
same numerical system. 3103 was followed by 44, the next was XIX, then
900, 211, CCCV. One was marked with egg-shaped figures which he took to
be possibly Mayan. It was slightly ajar. He pushed it open.

It was a schoolroom. Disciplined desks marched side-by-side toward the
teacher's raised podium hemmed in by blackboards gray with hastily
erased chalk. Only the four seats in front were occupied. He tip-toed
forward and slid into the second row. The teacher was a caricature
Chinese mandarin with queue, emerald-buttoned skullcap, gold
fingernail guards, tortoiseshell spectacles, brocaded robe.

"You have brought your homework?" he inquired, peering severely over
the top of his spectacles.

"No sir," answered Lampley, getting up again.

"For what purpose does the honorable delegate arise?" mocked the
teacher.

Lampley felt himself blushing. "I--I thought it was customary."

"All is custom as Herodotus said," remarked the teacher. "Herodotus was
a barbarian," he explained genially to the class. "Sit down."

In front of Lampley sat a child with long blonde pigtails, one with a
pink, the other with a white bow. She read aloud, "See little Almon.
Little Almon lives with his mother and his uncle. Almon has the cat.
Almon wants to play with the cat. The cat--"

"Quite enough," said the teacher. "Meditate."

The pupil next to the girl was the idiot. On the other side of the
aisle were a boy of twelve and a girl a little older. When the girl
turned her head Lampley saw her face was heavily bandaged. The Governor
lifted the top of his desk and took out a book. It had no covers, the
pages were torn and thumbed.

In the fifth year of the present reign, (he read) there appeared at
court a magician from the East who claimed alcheminical learning to
such a degree he was able to divine secret thoughts. A demonstration
being required of him, he demanded that divers ladies-in-waiting who....

The Governor turned the page. The next leaf was written in runes. He
riffled swiftly through the book. None of the rest of it was in the
Latin alphabet. He turned back to the page he had read. The letters
were all jumbled together, KJDRBWLSAYPZUQMXRQOTVBFLAIH, so that they
made no sense. He held up his hand. The teacher pulled down his
spectacles nearly to the end of his nose.

"No one is excused here," he announced. "Your attention, please."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lampley let his hand fall. The children rustled and squirmed.

"I have here a button," said the teacher. "It is not a true button but
a sort of courtesy button. It is in fact a mere plug, connected by the
demon of electricity to an ingenious apparatus located in the antipodes
of the Flowery, Middle or Celestial Kingdom. By pressing this button
I can cause the instant and painless demise of an anonymous foreign
devil. I repeat, the operation will cause the big-nosed one no distress
at all; he will know nothing. By pushing the button I destroy him; also
I bring untold happiness to all the sons of Han, whose ricebowls will
then be full, whose fields, wives and concubines will be fertile,
whose lords and tax-gatherers will become unbelievably merciful. My
problem: shall I press the button?"

He leaned back triumphantly in his chair and took from a desk drawer a
bowl and chopsticks. Steam ascended from the bowl as the teacher deftly
picked out long strings of noodles and sucked them into his mouth.
Lampley could smell the sharp odor of the soup in the bowl. The class
was silent while the teacher ate.

He put down the bowl and laid the chopsticks across it. "It is an
ethical problem, you understand. Luckily, since I am unfitted for
manual tasks--" he held up his fingernails for them to see "--I am
absolved from considering it. I shall never have to press the button or
not press the button."

Lampley raised his hand again.

"I told you no one is excused here," said the teacher.

"I was young," protested Lampley.

The teacher turned away disgustedly. He wrote on the blackboard in
angular, unconnected letters, "Death knows no youth."

The pupils in the front row all turned around to stare at the Governor.
The face of his son was set in a horrid grimace, teeth showing, eyes
watering gummy white in the corners.

"She was ambitious for me. It seemed best at the time," muttered
Lampley.

They all laughed together, snarling like dogs. Lampley hurled the book
at them. The pages fluttered as it fell with a thud on the floor. The
teacher wrote on the board in his singular script, Ambition, Doubt,
Subservience, Conformity, Treachery, Heat, Bravery, Murder, Hope,
Trifles, Treasure, Pity, Shame, Confession, Humility, Procreation,
Final. "No alternatives!" he shouted.




                               CHAPTER 3


The Governor stumbled into the aisle and ran. Before the door a coffin
rested on trestles. Tall candles burned at the head and foot. He did
not have to look in to know it was Mattie or that beside her was the
child she had never borne. He fell to his knees and crawled under the
coffin. The trestles lowered; he had to squirm forward flat on his
stomach to get clear of the casket. He got up and through the door,
slamming it behind him.

The lights were bright as before but the people below had all
disappeared. The fountain was dry; dust and lichen mottled the marble
figures. Beneath the railing hung tattered battle-flags, dulled,
tarnished, with great rips and tears. The floor, which he saw had been
paved with great tile slabs, was broken and humped. Pale, sickly weeds
thrust through the cracks. A sickening stench rose to make him gasp and
turn away.

He had been seeking a stairway back to the second floor. He followed
the quadrangle, came upon an unexpected hall between two rooms. At the
end of the hall a square chamber was flooded with brilliance from a
skylight. A legless man, many-chinned, frog-eyed, sat in a wheelchair.
Across his monstrous chest a row of medals glittered. "Come in, come
in," he roared jovially. "Any friend of nobody's a friend of mine."

"Can you tell me--" began the Governor.

"My boy," burst in the legless man, "if you want telling, I'm your
pigeon; if I can't tell you no one can. I've shot cassowaries and
peccarries, hunted dolphin and penguin, searched the seven seas for
albatross and Charlie Ross. Oh the yarns I could spin about sin and tin
and gin, about rounding the Horn in an August morn or lying becalmed
in the horse latitudes with a cargo of bridles and harnesses. I've
whaled off South Georgia, been jailed by Nova Zembla, failed on Easter
Island, entailed in the West Indies. I'm a rip-roarer, a snip-snorter,
a razzle-dazzle hearty-ho."

"You were a seaman?" asked the Governor politely.

"A seaman, v-d man, hard-a-lee man, a demon," sang the sailor. "Blast
and damn me, I've fathered six hundred bastards in all colors--white
don't count, naturally--from Chile to Chihili, from Timbuctoo to
Kalamazoo. Have a drink."

The Governor looked around. On a long bar were ranged dozens of
bottles, most of them empty. He picked up the nearest full one. It was
cold, green, opened, and full of beer. He put it to his lips, tilted
it, realized his throat had been dry, parched. "Thanks," he muttered,
taking it away reluctantly.

"Ah," said the cripple, "you should know the thanks I've had." He
indicated his medals carelessly. "Decorated, cited, saluted, handshook,
kissed on both cheeks. I've been thanked in Java and Ungava, in the
Hebrides and the Celebes, in Tripoli and Trincomalee, in Lombok and
Vladivostock. Have another drink."

"Thanks," repeated Lampley.

"Pleasure," responded the cripple. "Never drink alone, sleep alone, die
alone. You haven't been here before?"

Lampley was puzzled how to answer. "Yes and no," he said at last.

       *       *       *       *       *

The other nodded approvingly, tossed a ball into the air and caught it.
"Caution. Many a poor sailor's been drowned dead because the captain or
the mate yessed when he should have noed. Yes-and-no's a snug berth in
a landlocked harbor."

"I only meant...."

The man had another ball in the air now. "The meaning of meaning.
Semantics--that's a pun. Think you'll get the nomination?"

"It's touch and go," confessed the Governor. "I'm hoping."

The sailor was juggling three balls. He didn't look at them, just kept
catching and tossing in rhythm. "Touch and go. Skill and chance," he
said.

"That's right," agreed Lampley, drinking again.

"Comfortable?"

"Yes, thanks."

"Always said they should have put steam heat in here."

"But it's quite warm."

"Just wait till it snows. Drifts high as the roof, drifts high as the
trees, drifts high as mountains. Buried in snow, white on top, green
under the light here. A wonder we don't smother."

"Oh no," said the Governor, recalling the igloo in the refrigerator.
"It's porous or something. The air comes through."

The juggler had seven balls and three oranges in the air. He added two
empty bottles. "Nothing comes through. The outside never knows the
inside, the inside's locked away from the outside."

"But it's always possible to break through," argued the Governor.

The juggler's arms were knotted muscles of skill. He had many bottles
in the air besides the oranges and balls. "No man knows his fellow."

"Knowing and communicating are two different things."

"Yes and no," said the juggler judiciously. "You know a woman; do
you...?"

"Yes," insisted the Governor defiantly.

Still more bottles were tossed and caught. "You think so," said the
juggler. "What happens when you fail?"

All the bottles were in play now. Deftly the juggler wriggled to
the floor and added his wheelchair. "We fail yet nothing falls: the
supremacy of perpetual motion. Try the fourth floor."

"There isn't any fourth floor," said Lampley.

"That's right. Try it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Still juggling the balls, oranges, bottles and chair, the legless man
threw himself into the air and joined the circle of whirling objects.
The Governor left, went through the passageway again to the quadrangle
and looked over the railing. The fountain was gone. Goats nibbled at
young trees growing through the obscured tiles. A man rode a pony
listlessly and disappeared out of sight. A yellow wildcat prowled
around, pausing to hiss menacingly at the goats. Lampley walked past
closed doors, found himself in front of the elevator. He hadn't seen
it--then it was there.

"Down," announced the clerk.

"I don't want ..." began Lampley doubtfully.

"Going down," repeated the clerk firmly. "There's no up from here."

"How do all these people live?" asked the Governor. "The soldiers, the
women, the schoolmaster, the juggler?"

The clerk shrugged. "No differently than anyone else. Osmosis.
Symbiosis. Ventriloquism. Saprophytism. Necrophilism. The usual ways."

"Imagination? Illusion? Hallucination? Mirage?"

"We are what we are," said the clerk. "Can you say as much? Going down."

"I want to know," persisted Lampley.

"Don't we all? What's the use?"

The Governor temporized. "Will you let me off at my floor?"

"Do you know which it is?"

The Governor could not answer. He moved away from the elevator. There
was a hole in the carpet going deep into the floor. In the hole was
a heap of pennies, new-minted, bright coppery orange. He picked up a
handful and sifted them through his fingers. None of them seemed to be
dated, all had an eagle on one side and a scale on the other. A lump
of untreated metal, hedgehog sharp, pricked his flesh. He dropped the
pennies and put his hand to his mouth to suck the wound.

"Going down," the clerk called warningly.

Lampley said, "I only want--"

The clerk slapped his knee, doubling with laughter. He did a little
dance, his hands holding his abdomen. "Only!" he screamed between gusts
of mirth. "Only! That's all. He only wants."

With what dignity he had left the Governor entered the elevator. The
clerk, abruptly sober-faced, straightened up and shut the door. The
openwork of the cage was now interwoven with rattan in which trailing
fronds of greenery were stuck. Birds of somber hue--gray, black, slate,
dark blue--climbed with silent intensity over the basketry, hung beak
down from the roof, pecked quietly at the green. "Down."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lampley held his breath, sucked in his stomach. But there was no sudden
drop. The elevator glided with dignity past the second floor, the dim
lobby without acceleration, into the dark depths. He strained his
eyes for the first sign of light, of the tiled walls. Only the subtle
sensations of descent told him they were not stopped, rigid, just below
the first floor.

The clerk said, "The teacher has a list of all those who cheated."

"It must be long."

"It's not as long as the guilty think, nor as short as the innocent
believe."

"A youthful indiscretion," said the Governor lightly.

"The piano-smasher knows all about false references."

"Everyone does it," said the Governor. "You have to, to get a job."

"The juggler has suffered from the effects of kicked-back commissions."

"The custom is old. Who was I to change it?"

"The people in the concourse voted to send a man to the legislature who
promised to do certain things."

"Campaign oratory," said the Governor.

"The girl--"

"Stop," ordered the Governor. "Are you taking it on yourself to punish
sins?"

"Ah," said the clerk. "You think absolution should be automatic,
instant and painless?"

Lampley thought, if I had a heavy wrench or a knife or a gun I could
kill him and no one would know. His fingers tingled, his knees ached.
He tried to speak casually, to stop any further words the clerk might
utter. As he sought for some innocuous topic he saw the walls lighten,
recognized the yellowed tiles.

The clerk bent over the control lever as though in prayer, the birds
were all still and unmoving. Passing the shining white tiles Lampley
strained to catch the faint sound of the pianos. He could not be
sure he heard it, still less that he hadn't. The walls of the shaft
gradually became a pale green, deepening into skyblue so natural they
seemed to expand outward.

Smoothly the elevator tilted at an angle just steep enough to force
him to put one foot on the side of the cage in order to stay upright.
The clerk, clinging to the lever, had no trouble. They slid down
the incline at moderate speed. The tiled walls fell away; they were
traveling on a sort of funicular diagonally through the floors of
a vast department store. Counters of chinaware were set parallel
and perpendicular, the cups and dishes cunningly tilted to catch
the light: experimental, modern, conventional, traditional, all the
familiar patterns including sets and sets of blue willowware. Some of
the pieces were so curiously shaped it was impossible to guess their
use: platters with humps in their centers, cups pierced with holes,
plates shaped like partly open bivalves, cones, spheres and pyramids
with handles but no apparent openings.

They passed a millinery department where women were trying on feathered
helmets, fur busbies, brass-and-leather shakos, woolen balaclavas,
wide-brimmed straws, tight-fitting caps of interwoven fresh flowers.
Lampley saw they were all using long hatpins, jamming them recklessly
through the headgear under consideration. The discarded hats were not
put back in stock but thrown into large wastebaskets.

       *       *       *       *       *

The spaces between floors were open, revealing the heavy steel girders
with which they were braced. Through the openings in the girders
lean dogs chased scurrying rats, snakes twined themselves, bats
hung upside-down, land-crabs scuttled, stopping only to turn their
eye-stalks balefully toward the elevator.

[Illustration: Governor Lampley continued to drop further and further
into an abyss of gnawing terror.]

On another floor lined with mirrors that shot their dazzle into his
eyes like a volley of arrows, more women pulled and tugged girdles
over obstinate hips with concentrated effort, bending reverently over
unfolded brassieres to match the arbitrary cups against overflowing
breasts, holding up corsets which coldly mocked. Breech-clouted boys
waved huge fans, stirring the piles of garments on the tables.

The elevator continued downward. Shoppers strolled by book counters
with untempted glances, heading for the infants' wear to examine tiny
shirts, diapers, kimonos, blankets, fingering the embroidery, pursing
lips, smiling, shaking their heads. They stood abstractedly before
bright prints, sat stiffly on padded chairs, thumped mattresses,
fiddled with gifts and notions.

On a lower floor overhead lights glared down on roulette tables,
card games where the players squinted suspiciously over their hands,
blankets on which dice-throwers were shooting craps. The walls were
covered with posters: LAMPLEY FOR SUPERVISOR; A VOTE FOR LAMPLEY IS
A VOTE FOR YOU! The Governor was puzzled; he had never run for that
office.

The walls closed in again, the elevator tilted further, so that the
Governor was sitting on the side of the cage. It picked up speed now,
whizzing along, rounding banked curves, allowing momentary glimpses of
open spaces like railroad stations. "How far are you going?" Lampley
asked.

"Not far," said the clerk, coming out of his lethargy. "We're almost
there."

"Where?"

"There. Where else?"

They rounded another curve and shot down a grade. A bird near the
Governor ruffled its feathers sleepily. "I just want to get back."

"Who doesn't?" demanded the clerk harshly.

The walls of the shaft--it was a tunnel now--were transparent. There
was water pressing against them, a powerful stream, judging by the
exertions of the fish swimming against it. They ran a long way through
the river--Lampley was sure it was a river from occasional sight of a
far-off, muddy bank--and then the glass walls showed only earth, with
the roots of trees reaching down and piling up, baffled, against them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The walls became opaque, then vanished. They were running down the side
of a mountain covered with patches of snow. In places the snow was
piled in great drifts, carved by winds into tortured peaks; elsewhere
it lay in thin ruffled streaks and ovals. Out of these shallow patches
dark bushes sprang bearing red and yellow fruit. The bare spaces
between the snow were of moist, eroded earth where small brown plants
grew spikil.

The Governor could not see the sky nor the roof of the cavern--if they
were in some sort of cavern--only the ridges and spurs of the mountain
slope. There were scars on the rugged ground as from landslides, great
bites where the drop was sheer and jagged rocks stood out like drifting
teeth, but none of the slips could have been recent for the mounds at
their feet were firm-looking and grassy. They rounded still another
curve and the elevator slowed to a stop.

The clerk, who had clung protectively to the controls, straightened up
and looked inquiringly over his shoulder. Lampley stared back at him.
"All out," said the clerk, waving his hands. The birds fluttered, cawed
and shrieked, flying through the open door with an angry whir of wings.
They wheeled in uncertain circles and then made off in small, separate
flights. "All out," he repeated.

"I don't want to get out," said Lampley. "There's nothing for me here."

"Are you sure?" asked the clerk.

"I...." Lampley paused, uncertain.

"You see?" demanded the clerk triumphantly.

Resigned, the Governor made his way out. The clerk smiled at him, not
unfriendly, and Lampley almost begged him not to leave, not to abandon
him but to take him back. If the right words came to his tongue, if the
earnest feeling projected them into sound, he was sure he would not be
deserted. Then the elevator started slowly backing, gathering speed
as it went, running silently, shrinking in size until it was merely a
small speck on the side of the slope. Only the terminal bumpers and
the greasy track on which it had run remained.




                               CHAPTER 4


Lampley looked about him. Mountains shut off every horizon; the near
ones sharp, serrated, detailed, those far-off hazy, soft and rounded.
It was impossible to make out the character of the more remote, but
those on either side gradually melted into foothills with twisting
streams appearing from between shoulders and disappearing again behind
ridges. The light overhead, nebulous, indefinite, emanated from no
discernible body. It had the quality of sunlight filtered through thin
clouds, soothing to the eye as the balmy air was pleasant to the skin.
He felt refreshed.

Beneath his feet a fan-shaped plateau canted downward until it merged
with a mighty plain far off, a plain enclosing a vast lake. A broad
river meandered across the plateau and continued, as near as he could
tell, on the plain below. Dense blue-green grass grew lushly, heavily
powdered with yellow, white, and purple violets, dandelions, daisies,
buttercups and tiny pale blue flowers. The Governor took off his shoes
and socks, stuffing the socks into the shoes and knotting the laces
together. He slung them over his shoulder. The grass felt electric,
rejuvenating his feet as he trod on it.

A black fox crossed his path and paused to stare over his sharp nose
before continuing on. A squirrel balanced its body erect for a swift,
curious scrutiny before it was off with a flick of its tail. Other
small animals bounded past him, none seemed afraid. He thought he saw
deer in the distance, and a bear, but he was not sure.

He came to a bank of the river and followed it down. He could see
now it was joined by a number of tributaries before it emptied into
the blue, unruffled lake. Other rivers foamed down the more rugged
mountains on each side of the plain, all made their way to the lake
which seemed to have an island in it, a long way from shore.

When he reached a confluence with one of the branches he hesitated and
followed the smaller stream back until he came to a place where it was
crossed by high, flat-topped steppingstones nosed into the splashing
and spuming water. He tested the rocks gingerly, but they were firm,
and though wet, not slippery. Each time his progress was stopped by
such a meeting he found a similar set of stones not far away.

Nearing the lake he saw its color was a warm blue, with violet tones.
There was no hint of paleness in it; it was majestic, assured, unique.
He quickened his pace. The island assumed more definite shape. It was
large and irregular, with capes and promontories thrusting out into
the lake. Heavily wooded, willows came down to the shore, behind them
oaks and maples spread red and yellow leaves. Still further back the
blue tips of firs pointed above.

He came to the shore, a rocky beach, where the water lay perfectly
still over and between round, mossy stones. He waded in; the water was
delightfully cool without a suggestion of coldness. He reached down
and laved his face with it. When he straightened up he saw a rowboat a
little further out, unanchored, its bow resting on the rocks, its stern
hardly moving. The boat was the color of the lake save for a silvery
trim and silvery oars were neatly shipped in bright metal rowlocks.

The Governor made his way carefully to the boat, freeing it from the
rocks. He climbed in, laid his shoes in the stern, began rowing toward
the island. After a few strokes he paused and looked upward. The haze
was evidently permanent, which might somehow account for the unvarying,
equable climate. He shipped the oars and allowed the boat to drift. A
fish jumped in the water and splashed a widening circle. A bird, white
and gold with carmine beak, flew overhead. Everything was serene.

There was no wind but there seemed to be a weak current, for the boat
drifted very slowly, equidistant between the shore and the island. The
features he had noticed before became more differentiated; he noted a
number of landspits, small coves, moonshaped beaches. The woods did
not everywhere come right down to the water; in places they retreated
to make room for soft green meadows. He picked up the oars and rowed a
long distance before coming even with a particularly inviting cove.

       *       *       *       *       *

He debated whether or not there might be a still more desirable one
farther along. The temptation to refuse decision was great. It was with
a distinct effort that he turned the bow and ran the boat ashore.

The sands were fine and soft and golden, darkening a short way from the
lake into a pale brown border between the beach and the greensward. He
stepped out of the boat and hauled it clear of the water. Impulsively
he took off his clothes and put them with his shoes. He rolled on the
grass like a boy or a horse. The grass was soft as down, yet springy
and lithe beneath his body. He lay prone, snuffing in the smell of the
bruised stems. He stretched out his hands to reach into a patch of
clover with the idle thought that one of them might be four-leaved.
He saw with horror he was reaching with the reddish, vestigial,
unteachable hands on foreshortened arms of his son.

He felt sweat on his forehead as he shivered in terror. He jumped up
and ran for the boat, slipping and sliding on the crushed grass. He lay
trembling, eyes shut. Fearfully he drew his hands toward him and opened
his eyes. These were his own hands, familiar, middle-aged and freckled,
normally colored, still fairly smooth despite the raised veins, still
cunning to hold and twist and manipulate. His own hands, attached to
his own arms. Shaken, he sighed in shuddering relief.

He walked slowly over the grass toward the interior of the island.
Under the nearest trees--larch, beech, hickory--wild strawberries grew
thickly. He picked quantities of the elusive fruit, crushing it with
his tongue against the roof of his mouth, enjoying its sweetness,
allowing the juice to trickle slowly, deliciously down his throat. He
had not tasted wild strawberries since the day he and Mattie decided to
get married (No children till we can give them the things they should
have).

The trees were well spaced, letting the light enter freely between
them. There was no young growth, no saplings; all the trees were full
grown and healthy, with no sign of deadfalls or rotted logs. Only, far
apart, raspberry canes bearing their garnet, black, white or green
thimbles.

The trees didn't thin, they stopped abruptly. Ahead was a natural
clearing; in the center of the clearing a jungle growth of stalks and
vines rose in a high and inextricably tangled mound. Lampley advanced,
irresistibly attracted. He tried to part the interwoven stems but they
refused to give. On the ground were flat stones, some with sharp edges.
He picked up a fair-sized one and went back to the woods. With some
trouble he used it to saw off an oak branch.

He shaped the club to the right heft and bound the stone to it with
vines. He was dubious of its strength and his doubts proved justified
when, after hacking through some of the growth, the head came loose.
With new patience he reaffixed it and continued to cut away. His arms
began to ache; short, blinding flashes darted behind his eyes. He
persisted; there was no reason, no goal--he was simply impelled to
clear his way into whatever lay hidden by the tangle.

After refitting his crude ax again and again, he tore away the loosened
vines to reveal a white stone column, tapered slightly at base and
capital, its smooth sides spotted with the marks of the sucking disks
and clinging tendrils he had torn free. Beyond the column he was faced
by an enclosed, roofed rectangle. In this dim area no vines grew except
the sickly, inhibited, baffled ends whose invading thrust had faltered
in complete discouragement. Doubling back, they had interwoven in their
attempt to return to the light, but they had not been able to make a
curtain impervious enough to prevent him seeing the backs of the other
pillars and the high roof they supported.

He shouldered his way in and peered through the dusk to make out a
table flanked by two wide couches. Both table and couches were of the
same stone as the columns--marble, Lampley guessed--the couches piled
with soft furs. He took a tentative step forward.

Something glinted dully on the table, it was a bronze ax. He picked it
up, balanced it, tried the edge with his thumb. It was reasonably sharp
and the handle was firmly fitted into the head.

       *       *       *       *       *

With mounting enthusiasm he attacked the vines from the rear, chopping
and slicing, confident in this fine tool. Triumphantly he cleared the
space between two pillars, dragged the cut growth clear, returned to
his task. He freed another pillar, opened another space, dragged more
vines away.

Now the interior was lucid enough to show the floor as one large mosaic
of gleaming stones. The picture they composed was of a central fire,
the flames red, blue and yellow, surrounded by smaller, less brilliant
fires. On the outer edge animals turned their heads toward the warmth:
horses, oxen, elephants, lynx, hippopotami, wolves, lions, zebras, elk.

He resumed his work, finished clearing one of the long sides and
pulling down the severed branches from the roof before stopping again.
Backing away to the trees he saw the building was so simple in design,
so artfully proportioned, that it might have grown in this spot. The
low pitched roof was copper, untarnished, like the new-minted pennies
he had picked up in the hotel.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was almost full visibility inside the little temple now; on
impulse he hacked holes in the ivy on the other three sides for crude
windows. The fresh light illuminated the ceiling, intricately painted
in abstract designs with colors as bright as those of the mosaic. The
table and couches were the only furniture, but on the floor, neatly
laid out against columns, was a variety of fishing equipment.

He picked up a rod and held it out. It was limber, fitted with silk
line and a dry fly. A searching vine-tip had tried to loop around the
reel; he disentangled it. Carrying the rod, he left the temple and
sauntered into the woods. There were no paths, no need of any beneath
the widely spaced trees, yet he seemed to be following a definite
avenue, broad and almost straight. Despite his nakedness and recent
exertions he felt no chill in the shade; there was no tiredness in his
muscles nor discomfort from the ground under his feet.

He passed natural clearings where saplings had not encroached upon
the low-growing plants he recognized as edible, though clearly
uncultivated. There were peas and beans of strange species, large
and succulent, spattered with rainbow tints, purple melons, green
cucumbers, golden-yellow leeks and onions as well as unfamiliar shrubs
with broad green leaves and many kinds of flowers.

In a much larger clearing there was a pool of the same deep blue
as the lake, roughly oval and perhaps twice the size of the little
temple. At one end rushes grew tall, at the other, lotus offered their
heavy flowers haughtily upward. The rest of the pool was covered with
waterlilies and lily pads on which there was constant movement.

He thought they must be teeming with water beetles or very small frogs;
when he squatted at the water's edge he discovered the figures to be
tiny men and women leaping and frolicking on the moss, rolling smooth
pebbles tall as themselves, swimming out to the pads, climbing the
lilies and diving from them, sporting in the water, showing no signs of
alarm at his presence.

He lay down flat for a closer look. Some wore loincloths or loose
robes, most did not. Their graceful movements accented their strength
and endurance; they performed feats easily, which, if done in
proportion by any full-sized man would have exhausted him quickly, yet
these went from one game to another without flagging. They moved so
swiftly it was hard to estimate their number; he thought there might
be fifty of them here. He had no way of knowing if this was all of them
or whether those in sight constituted a part of their number, with the
rest engaged, perhaps, in less active pursuits.

As he became accustomed enough to tell them apart he saw there were no
children among them. Lampley could understand why they should segregate
their young, for some of their amusements were startling even to a
worldly adult; however the simpler variations suggested that they did
perpetuate themselves in the customary way. Except when forced by
circumstance to take a position on obscene literature, sex-offences
or unconventional behavior, Lampley was morally relaxed; he viewed
their recreation with the detached interest of an anthropologist, the
appreciation of an aesthete, the envy of a man past his youth. He
remained silent and watched for quite some time.

       *       *       *       *       *

He noticed one female wandering apart from the rest, neither joining
the others nor being sought by them. He thought there was dejection or
despondency in the set of her shoulders, in the aimless way she placed
one slender leg before the other or clasped her hands behind her neck.
All of the tiny people were exquisite, but she, because of her repose
and aloofness, seemed even more beautiful than the others. Without
quite intending to, he reached out his free hand and lifted her close
to his face.

She gave no sign of surprise or fear, but stared back into his eyes
whose irises were the size of her head. He marveled at the fineness
of her features, the flowing lines of her body, the gracefulness of
her arms and legs, the regal carriage of her head. Her loveliness was
poignant and perfect. He could not take his eyes from her.

It was impossible for him to put her down again, to part from her,
to walk away as though he had not touched and held her. Guiltily,
furtively, he carried her back to the temple, holding her against his
chest, fearful that the beating of his heart must be a frightening
thunder in her ears. He told himself he would not keep her long; before
she was missed he would take her back.

       *       *       *       *       *

He placed her on the table and sat on the couch admiring her. The
diminutive face was haughty and sullen but in no way distressed.
Her dark hair was piled on top of her head, falling with seeming
artlessness to her shoulders, her breasts were high and taut--round,
defiant shields--her thighs long and sleek. Even allowing for the
difficulty of discerning blemish in so small a being, the glowing
color, pale yet warm, the smooth hands and feet, the clustered body
hair, all spoke of such flawlessness that he had to control his fingers
lest they close in upon her to squeeze out the essence of beauty.

He whispered, "Do you hear me? Can you understand me?"

She moved her head slightly aside. Whether from outrage, annoyance
or indifference he could not tell. He did not think it was
incomprehension. When he repeated his questions she made no response at
all.

She seemed to weary; he thought he detected an effort to keep her head
erect, her eyelids from drooping. He placed her gently on the couch,
ran a fingertip lightly over her side. She trembled and stiffened. When
he took his hand away she curled in a graceful pose and closed her
eyes. He covered her with one of the furs from the other couch; she did
not move.

He picked up the fishing rod from where he dropped it outside when he
had brought her in. The vines appeared to have grown; he must chop them
closer, root them out if possible, clear the remaining sides entirely.
There was no reason to allow the temple to be covered again.

He strode purposefully back to the lake. By chance he did not arrive at
the cove where the boat was but further along the shore where a narrow
pier, no more than a series of poles stuck into the lake bottom with
planks laid on the cross-pieces, jutted out a few yards over the water.

He walked to the end and gazed into the clear depths. Marine
flowers--vegetable, mineral or animal--wavered in a multitude of
bright hues. Swimming, basking, or feeding among them were myriads of
translucent fish, large and small, silver, blue, red, orange, green,
nacreous gray. Below them flatfish moved slowly, rippling their bodies
in lazy humps. Above them torpedo-shaped swimmers sped madly with
barely perceptible flicks of tail and fins. Just under the surface,
breaking into the air every now and then, thickly clustered schools of
shiny fingerlings raced and darted in confusion.

Lampley was not a practiced angler, he was dubious of his ability to
cast the dry fly and he saw he had brought along the wrong equipment.
He let out a length of line awkwardly and watched the fly float on
the surface, then very slowly sink downward. The excitement which had
fevered him since he came upon the figures at the pool subsided. He was
content.

The crimson fish shot from nowhere at the now invisible fly and the
rod jumped almost from his hands as the reel unwound. The fish ran out
toward the channel, the line lifting clear, like a knife cutting up
through jelly. It circled and leapt, a dazzling blot of whirling color
against the lake's placid blue.

He gained back considerable line before the fish ran again. He reeled
in, the fish dived; each time it took less line. At last Lampley
brought it gasping and thrashing on its side to the end of the pier.
Lying flat, he was able to reach down and hook two fingers under the
distending gills to lift it into the air.

He carried the fish back to the temple. The vines were winding around
the base of the columns again; loose tendrils crept toward each other,
ready to intertwine upon meeting. He came in nervously, eyes averted,
as though by deliberately not searching for her he would assure her
still being there. She was on the couch where he had left her, one tiny
arm--was his memory playing him tricks? It did not seem so small as it
had--thrown over her eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

He had no knife to scale the fish, no fire to cook it. He was not
hungry himself but his captive might be. He put his rod away, took the
bronze ax and the fish outside. With the edge of the ax he managed
clumsily to cut the flesh from the backbone in a crude filet, then he
scraped the filet free of the skin. Tentatively he tasted a piece; it
was delicious.

He wished for a gold platter on which to serve food to her. He longed
for a retinue of slaves to prepare her meal, an army of servants to
wait on her. He stood by the couch, sadly deficient, a slice of raw
fish in either hand, eager, tremulous, yet happy.

The woman stirred, opened her eyes, threw off the fur cover with some
effort. She stood erect, stretching, shuddering in obvious pleasure,
pointing first one leg and then the other, massaging her flanks and
stomach sensuously. She had unquestionably grown larger: he could see
the faint, fine down on her arms now, the intricate convolutions of
her ears, the roundness of her navel. She was the length of his hand
instead of less than that of his finger.

He made his voice as low as he could. "Would you like to eat?"

She turned to him as though she had not been aware of his presence
until he spoke, but having learned of it was completely unaffected. She
stretched again and looked up at him disdainfully. With some difficulty
he broke off a crumb of the fish and offered it to her. Her glance did
not waver from his face; she reached out her hands and accepted the
morsel, nibbling it daintily, still staring at him. When she had eaten
it he offered more; she turned away and re-settled herself on the fur,
her back to him, her hip curving high.

He put the rest of the fish on the table and took up the ax. He trimmed
the new growth of vine down to the ground and cleared one of the
short sides. He stopped to sharpen the ax on the stone he had used
for cutting before he discovered it. He freed a corner pillar on the
opposite long side before he put up the ax and went to the pool.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was deserted. Had he caused them to leave, or brought some worse
disaster on them by stealing the woman! He ran his fingers through the
moss, peered intently at the water plants--they were gone. He was not
cruel or unreasonable; if she would only communicate with him he would
do anything she asked.

He twisted a flat leaf into a cone-shaped cup and filled it with water.
It leaked only one slow drop at a time, a growing, fat, wet pearl which
swelled until its weight detached it. Lampley felt quite complacent
over his cleverness in contriving so tight a cup. He returned to the
temple and sat on the other couch, watching her sleep, holding the
water in readiness. She had not covered herself; she was now the length
of his forearm.

He must have been too intent. She moved and turned, opened her eyes and
stared back at him indignantly. She did not make the slightest attempt
to hide any part of her body from him; she seemed to taunt him with its
promise, so impossible of fulfillment. His hand shook as he held the
leaf out to her. She grasped it and drank, smiling secretively. Instead
of returning it she threw it on the floor, spilling out the water that
was left.

"Would you like to go back to the pool?" he asked.

She did not answer; her full-lipped mouth set in a cruel line. It had
been a stupid question; she was tall enough to slide off the couch
without help and walk to the pool. Tears came to his eyes and his
throat ached at the thought of no longer being able to hold her in
his hand. He implored her to forgive him for having carried her away,
he pled with her to speak to him. He put his ear close to her mouth to
hear her words if she spoke.

She allowed the set of her lips to change without softening. She moved
to the opposite end of the couch, tidying her hair, twisting her head
as though looking in a mirror. He reached out, hesitated, touched her.
He ran his hands and lips over her body, fondled her, half in abject
pleading, half in equally abject desire. She trembled; he knew it was
with rage and loathing, not fear.

With the ax he fell upon the remaining vines, cut them to the earth.
Those he had mutilated before were growing again but they were not high
enough to give him release in chopping them down. When the temple was
cleared all around he came in again and stood looking at her. She was
still taller, still unrelenting. If he had originally wooed instead of
capturing her she could not have regarded him so.

Remorseful, he went once again to the pool. The lotus blossoms had
gone, leaving the dry pods swaying stiffly. The rushes and waterlilies
were brown and brittle, the moss was fuzzy in decay, the edges of the
lily pads were softly rotting. The small people had returned, unchanged
in size--she alone had grown, afflicted by the wrong he had done.
They lay near the edge of the pool in listless attitudes. Their hair
had turned gray or white, they had lost their suppleness, paunches and
wrinkles were visible.

He went away from them, walking slowly through the woods, glancing up
at the light or down at the soft humus underfoot. The trees stopped
short before a saucerlike meadow. Milky-blue poppies grew so thickly
their petals crushed against each other, hiding the stems and ground
beneath. He plunged into them, then halted; sharp stones hurt his feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

He bent down and pushed the flowers apart. Their roots grew in
twinkling, winking emeralds and rubies of all sizes and cuts. They were
packed loosely enough for air and water to seep in, tightly enough to
make it not easy to work them free and gather a handful. He tried to
select the largest stones, discarding one for another, moving deeper
into the field. His hands and cradled arms full, he let them drop and
chose the smaller, more evenly matched gems. He threw all these away
also and began all over; whatever combinations of size, cut or color he
picked up did not equal the possibilities of this profusion.

Dissatisfied, he turned from the poppies. They had called to him,
promising, then promised again and yet again. He could not--with a
handful of stones such as these--say the promise had not been kept; he
could not say it had.

He paused to bathe his bruised feet in the pool. The lotus plants had
disappeared completely, the rushes drooped brokenly, the lilies floated
like scraps of worthless paper, the lilypads were limp and soggy. The
little people had lost their hair and much of their flesh, their skins
stretched over protruding bones. They did not move save to turn over a
weary hand or draw up a cramped leg.

He came to the temple. The persistent vines had again begun their
climb up the pillars. The woman stood on the couch, her hands over her
breasts, fingers open around the nipples. Her head was level with his
chest; she tilted it to look at him with the same inexorable hate. He
poured the rubies and emeralds at her feet. She glanced down, kicked a
fur casually over them.

"I thought you might like them," he mumbled. "They ... they--"

She hunched up one shoulder. He was sure she understood his words.

"Are you hungry?" he asked, then he saw she had eaten more of the fish.
"Are you thirsty?"

She threw herself down on the furs, buried her face in her elbow.
Resentfully he took the ax and cut back the vines. Those he had chopped
down at first were dry and brittle; they would burn if he had some
way of making fire. He gathered a trailing handful and brought them
inside. Her back was turned as he arranged them on the mosaic. He laid
the flat stone next to them and struck it slantwise with the ax. Some
of the blows resulted in futile sparks but the stems did not ignite.

He gave up; with the fishing rod he returned to the lake. He pushed the
boat into the water and rowed with the current past the pier, heading
for the deeper parts. He laid the rod over the stern and let the way
of the boat pull the line slowly from the reel. The fly stayed on the
surface.

His eyes searched the further shore. Some of the distant mountain peaks
were bare, others were forested to the top. Some fell in palisaded
steps down to the plain, some descended in series of rounded hills,
some sloped evenly. Nearly all carried rivers to the lake. There were
no signs of any way out of the cavern.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the island side, great trees grew out over the water. From their
boughs fell seed-pods which floated diagonally across the current to
the other shore. Waiting for them at the edge of an extensive swamp
were yellow swans with black beaks who stretched their long necks to
gobble the prizes. They fought among themselves for the tid-bits,
flapping their wings, rising partway into the air, twisting, their
webbed feet tightly curled.

Past the overhanging trees the island curved inward in a wide,
crescent-shaped beach of blue sand. He was tempted to land but the
current carried him on before he could make up his mind. He passed a
flat cape and low bluffs against which the calm lake churned white. He
thought he made out the ruins of a castle far behind the bluffs, but
the quality of the light changed from soft to hazy; what appeared to be
ruins might as well be a natural formation of rock.

He guessed he must be halfway around the island; it was easier to drift
on than row against the current. On the opposite shore animals had come
down to drink, tapirs and zebus, raccoons and gazelles, llamas and
koala bears. A few raised their heads as he passed, the majority paid
no attention.

There was a ruffling of the water and an ominous sucking sound as the
tide changed its easy momentum into an irresistible pull. Furiously the
boat was whirled around--stern, bow, bow, stern--in a dizzying circle.
He rowed with all his might, feathering his oars in panic as often as
not, almost falling backward as they failed to bite. He half rose,
digging them in, pulling desperately, returning, pulling with all his
strength. The boat steadied; the bow pointed straight ahead. Almost
as quickly as he had been caught in the vortex he was free of it. He
inhaled raspingly, dropping his head on his chest.

The lake widened; it was so far across he could barely make out details
on the mainland. The island changed character; forbidding basalt walled
it, interrupted by inlets where the water surged in sullen, angry
obstinacy. Foam gushed and spouted from great holes in the rocks,
adding to the tumult. Lampley thought he saw ships in one of the
inlets--high-prowed, single-masted vessels with low free-boards guarded
by overlapping shields--but like the ruined castle they could have been
oddly shaped masses of rock.

He must have almost circled the island, for he saw the plain he had
followed from the elevator on the further shore. This part of the lake
was placid and the undertow negligible. He put up his oars and took the
rod in his hands, pulling at it so the fly skipped lightly over the
water.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fish was green and gold, pure colors, unsullied. It was clearly too
heavy for the line. Lampley played it--awkwardly--exhausted it, brought
it to the boat and unhooked it to lie, flopping and dying and turning
a mottled brown, on the floor-boards. He looked down at the cruel,
voracious mouth and felt his own setting in similar lines. He rowed to
the island and landed on an unsheltered beach of reddish sand.

It was a long way to the temple; he began to think he had missed it
when he saw the roof and columns ahead. The vines had made great
progress in his absence; in places they had reached the eaves and were
writhing over the cornice.

She was leaning against a pillar, facing him, one hip slouched lower
than the other. She was nearly four feet tall; her proportions had not
altered, nor did her increased size reveal any imperfection. He was
shaken by the same mixture of awe and lust, admiration and avidity.

When he showed her the fish she went to the table and taking the
scrap left of the first one, threw it out. The emeralds and rubies
lay disregarded on the furs, the pile of withered vines was as he had
left it. He waited with diminishing hope for her to give some further
recognition of his presence. "I have been all around the island," he
said, knowing she would not acknowledge his speech.

       *       *       *       *       *

He cleared the vines away, wondering if she approved his industry. He
explored the woods until he found a plant on which gourds had dried.
He kicked one, broke off the neck, filled it at the pool. There were
no signs of her people. The gourd did not leak at all as he carried it
back.

She had divided the fish in half, skinned and boned it less wastefully
than he had the other. She was able to work at the table now, though
with some difficulty. Tall as a very small woman she yet retained the
tantalizing, provocative, shameful appeal of her original size. He set
the gourd down shakily.

She took it up as though it had been there all along and she had only
now come to need it, and poured half its contents over herself. It
seemed to him, weak with longing, that she displayed an added, lazy
insolence as she smoothed the water over her breasts and under her
arms, moving in studied tempo, reveling in the pleasure of her own
touch. She walked slowly to the vines and dried herself carefully, over
and over. She neither concealed nor displayed her body; she acted as
though she were alone.

He put his hand on her arm, she looked up at him in the simulated
surprise of cold inquiry. Her lips were pressed together, but not so
firmly as to disfigure their symmetry. Her eyes were gray, with green
and golden flecks; the slight droop of the lids emphasized her look of
disdain. Her skin was smooth as glass. He could wait no longer. He was
consumed with desire for her.

He clasped her, lifted her, threw her on the couch, began kissing her
gluttonously. He tried, first with cunning, then with violence, to part
her lips, to move her arms from their rigid position. She remained
completely passive, her eyes wide open in their implacable scorn. He
paused in his onslaught, begged her to forgive him, to say something,
to voice even a rejection. She lay silent, unmoving, unresisting as he
wept and shouted.

His hands dug into her shoulders, caressed, gripped, pulled at her
body. His mouth smothered hers. He closed his eyes to shut out her
derision, opened them again to see if she had relented. He pressed
himself against her, forced his body into hers. The shock telegraphed
back to him.

She became wild and wanton and responsive. She was avid, insatiable,
shameless. She exhausted him, drained him, wore him into incapacity,
then invited, teased, coaxed, compelled him into fresh lechery. The
element of the perverse, inherent in her size, her captivity, her
unveiled loathing, added the final touch to their ecstasy. They came
together again and again without concession in a rape of the courtesan,
wringing joy out of their enmity.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he collapsed, exhausted but less than content, she calmly rose and
drank thirstily from the gourd. He watched her easy, fluent movements,
knowing she was conscious of him and of their embrace, knowing that
it signified no intimacy to her, that she was untouched. "Won't you
forgive me?" he begged. "Won't you speak, or at least show you hear?"

She combed her long hair with her fingers and twisted it deftly into
place. She lifted one leg, bent at the knee, and studied her foot. She
sauntered to the columns and stood at the edge of the temple looking
out, her back to him.

He made himself get up and go to her, kneeling at her feet. Even in
his abjection he could not refrain from embracing her legs, resting
his cheek against her flesh. She stood quietly, as though waiting for
his next move. When he did nothing beyond implore her pardon, she
disengaged herself calmly, turned away, and walked to the opposite row
of columns.

It no longer seemed imperative to keep the vines chopped down. He
let them grow at will except on the one side he kept cleared. Though
he knew no hunger save for her, he fished and fetched water for
her to drink and bathe. He thought she must tire of the monotonous
diet, remembering the berries he brought her gourdsful. She ate them
greedily. When her mouth was stained with the juice he could not
control his longing; he took her once more. She responded as before; as
before she remained inviolable.

She grew no more, and this pleased him, guaranteeing as it did a
continued mutual enslavement. In midcycle between his despair after
forcing her and helplessness before doing so again, he gloated over her
smallness, her estrangement from everyone but him.

He did not return to the pool. Instead, he made the longer journey
to the lake for water. He went back to the poppies by a roundabout
route, picked an armful, leaving the gems in which they were rooted
undisturbed. She let them lie at her feet where he had placed them.

On his next homecoming to the temple she had made a fire, succeeding
where he had failed. It burned swiftly on the mosaic, consuming the
dried vines as quickly as she could feed them to it. He took the ax
and cut some green boughs, chopping them into convenient lengths. With
these and the vines the fire could be kept alive, smoking, not giving
out any warmth, but adequate to cook the fish he caught.

       *       *       *       *       *

She took a portion of whatever he brought her--fish, fruit,
flowers--and sacrificed it in the fire. When she was not sleeping,
bathing, preening or standing looking out, she sat beside the embers,
quiet, absorbed. Though he knew her indifference was unfeigned,
this additional withdrawal added to his torment. When it became
unendurable--when his lust and pique and desire to master her overcame
his submissiveness--he attacked her and met her raging passion.

Otherwise she did not acknowledge his presence directly. She put
his portion of cooked food on the table for him, throwing it out
indifferently when it was left uneaten. Watching her sleep, tending
the fire or brooding, he felt the outrage of her denial. His conquest
of her body should have brought submission, escape, revenge, gradual
conciliation--change of some sort--not refuge in her unfailing
imperviousness. She had gelded him without giving him a eunuch's
compensations. Sometimes, tormented by frustration, he took her
brutally, more often he approached her with tenderness and deference,
only to be frenzied into ruthlessness by her apathy.

Finally he knew she was with child. He became slavish in his anxiety,
his solicitude, his devotion. He tried to care for her, to watch over
her food, her rest, her exertions. She submitted to his attentions when
it was unavoidable, she showed no pleasure or gratitude. Swollen, she
moved slowly, lay from meal to meal on the couch with her eyes open.

He stayed close to the temple, hurrying back from his errands,
resisting the temptation to explore the island. When the child was
born he would bathe it in warmed water, wrap it in soft leaves, cover
it with the furs. After the birth some way of reconciling himself to
her would be miraculously revealed, she would speak, he would discover
a means of communicating with her people and reviving them. He would
cherish the child, protect, nourish, develop, teach, encourage it; it
would be the means of establishing himself not only with her but with
this place.

A somber, thought-cloying dread hung upon his mind. He walked warily,
glancing frequently over his shoulder. If she wanted to leave the
temple there was nothing to stop her; so soon as she had grown tall
enough to get down from the couch by herself she could have walked
away. He knew she would not go yet he feared to find her gone; always
when he returned it was a shocking relief that she was there. He
babbled to her at length of his apprehensions, he prayed her to assure
him she would change, would relent after she bore his child, that
nothing would part them.

While she slept he put his hand timidly on her belly and felt the life
in it. The thought excited him; he was ashamed of his excitement.
He knelt beside the couch to touch her knees and thighs in selfless
purity. He kissed her hands, her temples, her hair; when she stirred
and frowned, he retreated, hoping she would not waken.

She was near to labor when he heard the shouts and the clang of metal
against metal. He ran to her, ready to protect her and the child with
his life. She moved away, always keeping a space between them. No one
coming upon them could imagine she wanted his assistance or that he had
established any right to offer it.

The barbarians burst into sight, waving swords, holding their round
shields high above their heads. Their crooked teeth flashed, their
mouths opened in wild yells, their rough garments flew back to show
their coarse, hairy bodies.

He tried to pull her with him, to lift her in his arms and carry her
outside. She resisted obstinately, fiercely, desperately, clinging to
the couch, to the table, showing to the full the revulsion and hate in
her eyes.

The invaders passed the open side of the temple; Lampley could not
believe they had failed to see it or that it hadn't excited their
curiosity. Yet they did not turn aside; incredible or not, they were
saved. The last one was out of sight when the woman screamed.

He clapped his hand over her mouth; the barbarians came from the
side he had let the vines overrun again, cleaving their way through,
trampling out the fire, smashing the water gourd, scattering the latest
gifts he had brought. They saw and came at him, pointing their weapons
so that he could see the faint kinks in the crudely forged steel. He
tried to stay, willed himself to meet the swords' edge. Only when she
threw her arms around the foremost warrior, offering her ripe belly to
his blade, casting a triumphant, malignant look in Lampley's direction,
did he finally give in and fly.




                               CHAPTER 5


He ran through the woods, clamor of pursuit close behind. He headed
straight for the lake, remembered he had moved the boat, changed
direction. He twisted and turned, hoping to deceive them; they stayed
on his heels, gaining, gaining. He reached the shore and plunged into
the water. He was not a good swimmer but the current carried him to
the beach where the boat was while the pursuers had to turn inland to
bypass a thick copse.

       *       *       *       *       *

He splashed inshore, reaching the boat barely ahead of them. They
swarmed at him as he stumbled, pushed the boat into the water with a
violent shove and clung to the bow's protection against the rocks they
hurled. The missiles splashed close but soon the current took him out
of range. With immense difficulty he got himself aboard, and rowed to
the opposite shore with his eyes fixed on the island.

It occurred to him that he must be headed directly for the swamp where
he had seen the yellow swans. He changed direction; after pulling
steadily at the oars, the keel grated on something hard and unyielding.
He shivered at the coldness of the air and saw he had grounded at the
mouth of a small glacier embedded between rocky hills. He dressed;
leaving the boat high on the gravel bordering the ice, he began walking
along the shore. The island was far, far away, mistily lilac in the
distance, lost and irretrievable.

His shoes, so unaccustomed, spurned and slipped on the gravel and the
rocks, floundered in the sand. The chilling wind from the glacier
slapped at his back. Ahead trees--stunted, thick-growing, crowded by
underbrush--came down to the water's edge. He pushed through touching
branches into still denser thickets, forcing his way against increasing
resistance, being forced in turn further and further inland.

Where the tangled growth ended abruptly there was no grass, only stony
shale interrupted by ragged shrubs, scanty snowdrifts, bent, leafless
trees. Inconstant winds eddied around him, stinging his face, pulling
at his clothes, tearing loose twigs from the trees, dead leaves and
chaff from the ground, whirling them upward, driving them before it,
allowing them to settle only to scatter them again for new torments. He
trudged on, head down, walled from the lake--not a glimpse, a fleeting
glimpse of the island--climbing, descending, detouring, making he knew
not what scant advance.

Advance to where, to what? In an unknown direction to an unknown
destination. Nothing could be more stupid; the intelligent thing to do
was stop, refuse to go farther. But stop himself, he couldn't.

He stumbled into a valley between gloomy cliffs. There was no
vegetation here save sinewy creepers which seemed to spring directly
from the harsh ground, their roots mercifully hidden. They wound and
tangled, twisting and untwisting, ever seeking something to climb. He
tripped on them, righted himself hastily, fearful that if he fell they
would choke him, hold him fast before he could rise. Small dun-colored
birds fluttered through them, pecking haphazardly at unseen insects,
rose in unsteady, uncertain flight only to settle again a few yards
away. He fell; terrified, he scrambled up, shaking himself loose, not
really believing the vines had let him go.

He looked up at the far-off peaks. What had they to offer him? Romantic
towers, magic fastnesses, mystic havens? Cold, craggy, misery. He trod
carefully between the vines; perhaps he could reach the next hill
before they tripped him once again.

He heard an angry, outraged, murderous squealing and grunting as a
horde of wild boars, tiny eyes half-closed, tusks glinting with saliva,
shaggy bristles standing out, charged with pounding hooves. He was
directly in their path, there was no shelter he could take, and it was
clearly useless to run.

He waited, quaking, as they came closer. The foremost animal, the
leader, the most ferocious, became enmeshed in the loose vines and
began struggling and jerking. His companions shouldered, shoved,
worried and bit him; those behind attacked the ones in front. They fell
upon their stupefied leader, tore him to pieces and devoured him. Then
those who chanced to be bitten or slashed were treated the same way,
finally those who had merely been bloodspattered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lampley ran from the scene and splashed through a wide stream he hoped
would at least deter the frantic beasts. He climbed over sticky clayish
plants with long, tongue-like petals pulling and sucking at his shoes,
and bloated grass whose watery blades split apart under his weight,
giving out vile fumes to make him sick and giddy. On a rise he looked
back at the boars, milling in directionless knots. Far beyond he caught
brief, elusive sight of the lake and island. Reluctantly he started up
a spur bare of all vegetation, grim and desolate.

The yellowish rock on which he trod was smooth and firm underfoot at
first; he climbed over a ridge and began a fairly easy ascent of an
escarpment biting into the mountainside. The hard rock gave way to
brittle, friable material that broke and crushed underfoot. He came
to outcroppings, miniature buttes which crumbled and rolled at a
touch. He found himself walking in a mass of shifting stone, loose and
unpredictable.

Ahead, the slope became a series of shoulder-high cliffs, mounting like
steps. Very carefully he approached the first and put his hands on the
edges to pull himself up. The rock disintegrated under his fingers.
He stretched his arms forward and tried to lever himself up with his
elbows. The entire face broke off to go sliding and tumbling past him.

He was too far up to retreat and seek a less treacherous way, the best
he could do was strike out for the adjoining ridge. He moved cautiously
but the strata seemed to shift so that he was faced by a palisade
high as his head. He reached up to grasp the ledge. It too split and
shattered. He looked in vain for an easier ascent or a crevice where he
could work his way up.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now the cliff towered over him, far above his reach, menacing, sullen.
He followed it, searching for a place where it was lower. His feet
slipped on the loose stone; it was like walking on marbles. He tried to
run, to defeat the restlessness of the rock by speed. His ankle turned;
pain and weakness fought each other; he became part of a plunging,
toppling, sinking, downward slide, with gravel, debris and boulders
crashing around him. The only way he could keep his feet was to run
with the avalanche, to embrace the illusion that he was surfboard
riding. By a tremendous effort he retained his balance.

He knew it was impossible for him to survive; he must resign himself
to being crushed and buried under the landslide. It was pointless to
protect his head with his arms as he was doing, it was pointless to run
at all. His mind surrendered, only his body continued to fight against
destruction. He could not believe his mind didn't really know fear;
at a point like this communication was cut off; instincts and reflexes
took over.

The roar of the fall became a rumble and then a crackle diminishing
into silence as the last fragments rolled and settled. He was almost at
the mountain's foot, in a sort of natural quarry hemmed in by palisades
on three sides, open only the way he had come down--and this was paved
with loose stones in uneasy disarray. It was impossible to scale the
sheer cliffs; even at the risk of causing another avalanche he had
to go back. Cautiously he began the ascent. Though the rocks turned
and shifted under his feet they did not crumble. Picking his way with
exaggerated lightness he covered perhaps a hundred, a hundred and fifty
feet. He began to hope he might reach a point where he could strike out
and away from the incohesive slope.

With a loud report a rock shot from the palisades behind him, arched
over his head to crash in front and come bounding down toward him. He
jumped aside. It tumbled all the way to the foot of the precipice.
From near where it landed another stone discharged itself to fall just
behind him. While it was still moving, a ragged bombardment from all
three sides began, increasing in intensity till the air was filled
with missiles. Fresh slides were started by their impact; the entire
mountainside seemed to be converging on him with varying speeds,
diving and plunging, lurching and sprawling. He crouched and cowered.
An immense chunk shattered nearby, showering particles and dust.

The palisades erupted in staccato explosions, echoed when the
projectiles hit the slide and increased its velocity. He was shaken to
realize that the rocks were sentient, individually or collectively, and
he was their intended target rather than an endangered spectator. He
was doomed; though they missed him a hundred, a thousand times, on the
hundred and first or the thousand and first, chance would expose him,
make him vulnerable, destroy him. Even if the ground held firm he could
not climb out of range before he was felled. And the ground was not
holding firm.

There was no escape; who could control the unswerving malice of the
rocks? Who indeed? Suddenly he stood erect and held up three fingers in
the sign of the letter Shin, the initial of the name Shaddai.

Instantly the mountainside became still. Birds soared overhead, grass
sprouted through the rubble and in the crevices of the rocks, clear
brooks wound sinuously from the mountaintop, lizards basked on flat
spaces, insects moved speculatively from object to object, sheep
wandered in search of food.

He threw himself down on a bed of ferns, newly sprung into life. The
soft, spiraling ends of the fronds touched his cheeks and hands gently.
He moved guardedly, unwilling to crush the tender stems. Raising
himself on his elbows he peered down at the pale, feathery snails, the
stiff, spotted leaves, the hairy stalks. His throat tightened with
wonder and gratitude.

       *       *       *       *       *

He got up, walked slowly over the solid ground. When he had climbed
higher than the palisades he struck out for a plateau, bare of
vegetation but not desolate. Shallow ponds sparkled, crystal pinnacles
glittered, mounds of quartz reflected the light. Snakes and crocodiles,
strange and nameless reptiles in bright, jeweled colors moved smoothly
out of his path. A tinted mist rose from one of the ponds, taking
the shape of Mattie. All the women he had known showed themselves in
wisps and shreds of vapor. Some were laughing, some wistful, pleading,
tempting; all dissolved as fast as they formed. He fled.

He fled from the plain into a forest where leaves made an umbrella
against the light, through fields where grain was turning black, past
rutted gray roads and decaying rail fences. He passed clumps of berry
bushes, bare of fruit, whose thorns raked his hands and face. He
stumbled over plowed furrows where the dried clods were woven together
with spiderwebs and made his way through harrowed fields where the
exact lines were blurred by rebellious weeds, rooted at random.

The air was cold, colder even than at the glacier, and the light
hazier, as though too far from its source. Weeds were persistent, but
colorless and sickly. His foot came against something harder than
the dry earth; he kicked the weeds aside to reveal a railroad track,
crusted and pimpled with rust. There were two tracks, eight, twelve,
twenty, an inestimable parallel multitude of them, the steel flaking,
the ties rotted, the spikes and plates worked loose. He walked between
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The skeleton of a model T Ford stood crosswise on the rails. The body
was gone, and the hood; the brass radiator, capless, had turned green
and brown. A wooden box was athwart the chassis in place of a seat, its
ends sticking out over both sides. The tires were flat and shredded.

Lampley lifted the front end and shifted it so that it headed along the
right-o-way. He turned the ignition key, pulled down the gas lever,
stood in front of the radiator, pulled the choke-wire and twirled the
crank several times. Then he went back and sat on the box, but not
under the steering wheel.

The motor coughed and started, the engine missed in syncopated rhythm,
shaking and rattling the frame, failing and fading, catching again. The
car bumped slowly over the ties. The Governor, satisfied, made no move
to take the wheel. The tracks came together in a series of multiple
switches. The Ford stopped, the motor clanked and quit, steam spouted
up from the radiator.

Lampley got out. The surface of the rails was no longer rusty but
bright with wear. The ties were new, reeking with fresh creosote. They
were too close together for his stride; he walked partly on them,
partly on the roadbed.

The single diesel car panted on a siding, its garish paint flecked and
peeling. He climbed aboard, walked between the rows of plush-covered
seats to the front. The clerk sat in the cab, reading a comic book. He
nodded when he saw Lampley. "Board," he shouted. "Aw-a-booooooard!"

The diesel started smoothly. The Governor sat down just behind the
clerk and looked out the window. They were running through a petrified
forest. Some of the trees were riven down the middle, showing the dark,
livid heart, the gleaming saffron sapwood, the red-brown bark. Fallen
trunks lay in shallow oil, black, broken by lurid rainbows. The car
heeled over slightly as it rounded a curve, then more steeply on the
opposite side as it picked up speed and took another.

The clerk said, "The island under the world, ay? Good or bad?"

"You can't simplify like that," protested the Governor.

"Can't I? Some law?"

"I mean...."

"Of course you do, of course you do. Enjoy the fishing?"

Lampley saw again the brilliant creatures he had pulled from the lake.
"I only caught what was necessary for food," he muttered defensively.

"Necessity is the mother of convention," sighed the clerk; "necessity
is the mother of conception, of prevention. Also correction, election,
protection, vivisection, selection and so forth. Never perfection."

"Ah," said the Governor, thinking of the woman.

The clerk swung a handle, pulled a throttle, pushed a button. The
coach was filled with whirling sparks and balls of fire. "Necessity is
the mother of pretension," he sang operatically. A duststorm gathered
outside the window, grit forced its way in. The car gained further
momentum, swayed and rocked.

"Do we have to go so fast?" asked Lampley.

"Necessity is the mother of dissension and projection. The faster we
go, the less room for argument."

The car seemed to be skimming above the rails. The clerk pressed all
the buttons in front of him. A pornographic picture was projected on a
three dimensional screen. Lightning flashed all around. The comic book
which the clerk had negligently dropped flamed up and was reduced to
curling char. The wind outside roared with hurricane velocity. There
was nothing to see through the window but the lumps of earth the storm
picked up and held in suspension.

The landscape twinkled into a tunnel, black and close and sooty. The
tunnel spiralled upward; the diesel slowed, barely kept from slipping
back on the grade. The dark sides gave way to illuminated bas-reliefs
showing sphynxes and dragons pursued by hunters with spears and bows,
pyramids on which victims were sacrificed with obsidian knives, battles
between miniature figures in green or red against others in white or
blue while their commanders rode back and forth waving microscopic
swords, tableaus of unearthly quietness where boats were poled up wide,
muddy rivers flowing through empty prairies.

       *       *       *       *       *

The tunnel became black again; frigid cold swept through the coach.
Icicles formed on the ceiling, frost obscured the windows in flat
withes woven together. Lampley shivered so hard he became slightly sick
to his stomach. He drew his jacket tight, hugging his chest, trying to
control his chattering teeth. The clerk left the cab and built a fire
in the aisle. He ripped out seats and fed them to the blaze. By the
time the coach was bare the frost-ferns were melting from the windows.

The clerk spun a crank; the light inside turned blue. He hauled a
lever back, it changed to green. He jabbed a button; the interior
became dark. Lampley saw they were moving smoothly into a terminal,
with redcaps running alongside on the platforms. "All out," shouted the
clerk. "Change here for North and South, East and West. All out!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lampley stood on the platform. "Carry your baggage, sir," asked a
porter.

"Sorry, I don't have any," apologized the Governor.

The porter's dark face showed his disbelief. "Everyone has baggage."

"But I don't," insisted Lampley.

"You're trying to cheat a poor man," said the porter. "You're trying to
cheat society. You're trying to cheat yourself. Even trying to cheat
God."

"Believe me, I'm innocent," cried the Governor.

Loudspeakers bellowed, "Innocent! Innocent!" Far-off cold echoes
sounded stonily, "... cent ahahaha ... cent ahahaha...." Lights winked
on and off. The porter prostrated himself on the platform. An unseen
band blared _The Stars and Stripes Forever_, firecrackers and rockets
went off, a phosphorescent display spelled out KISS ME KID, a barrel
rolled and bumped to a stop, disgorging clowns who began tumbling,
somersaulting, standing on each other's shoulders to form a cluster
reaching to the arched roof where the top man wrote in white chalk on
the smoky vault, DRINK MOXIE.

Lampley stood undecided, then walked briskly to the waitingroom. Its
chrome and plastic benches were empty, the space between them was
filled with robots busily burnishing each other's metal, adjusting each
other's mechanism, screwing and unscrewing visiplates, audio-systems,
sensitizers, olfactometers. He saw no humans. He paused at the
unattended newsstand to look over the tattered, smudged periodicals.
_Journal of Subatomic Medicine._ _The Martian Monthly._ _Space News._
_Androids Review combined with The Magazine for Mechanical Men
Astronomer & Astrogator._ _Time-Travel Tribune._ There was nothing here
to interest him.

Outside the waitingroom he came to the subway stairs, gleaming in white
and nickel. They led to an underpass; he could hear the trains rumbling
and thundering overhead. He followed the passage to the station; the
empty tracks emerged, plunged on into darkness. He sat on a bench; no
train came.

He got up and walked along the platform. It went deeper and deeper into
the tunnel without narrowing to an end. He came to a place where the
tracks were boarded over with heavy planks, flush with the concrete on
which he walked. On the other side of the boardwalk small shops offered
their wares in dusty, ill-lit windows.

The nearest displayed boots and shoes, sandals, clogs, getas, slippers,
moccasins, greaves, buskins, gaiters, spats, wellingtons, overlapping
damascene plates to protect the feet of the well-shod knight. All were
in sets of threes: right, left, interpediate. The Governor entered; the
salesman, dressed in black, hurried to him, rubbing his black-gloved
hands together. "Why are all your shoes in triples?" Lampley asked.

The salesman opened his eyes in surprise. "How else would they be?"

"In pairs, naturally."

"But my dear sir, there's nothing natural about that. Of course there
are poor afflicted creatures with only two feet; for them we recommend
a very fine prosthetic craftsman who also supplies artificial ears
and natural-looking uvulas. But normal persons will find themselves
well-served here, I assure you. Well-served indeed." He pursed his
mouth and looked at Lampley with a combination of severity and
servility.

"It--it's all relative, then?" faltered the Governor.

The salesman shrieked. "You monster, you fiend, you horror! Begone!
Begone, I say!"

Lampley closed the door behind him. The next shop was a
tobacconist-stationery-novelty store. In the showcase were giant pipes,
twists of burley, packages of latakia and perique, warped boxes of
dried-out cigars, false mustaches, lapel flowers to spray water in
startled eyes, puzzles, cryptograms, tiny spheres fitting endlessly
inside of each other, moldering reams of paper, flyspecked envelopes,
faded typewriter ribbons, filing indices in cyrillic. The Governor was
not surprised to see the storekeeper was the legless sailor-juggler.

"Come in, lad; a hearty welcome to you," he said. "Been traveling in
strange parts, I see. How are the women?"

"Small," said the Governor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The juggler smacked his thigh with a big hand. He laughed till he
coughed. He strapped on a pair of aluminum legs and danced a hornpipe.
He took a gallon jug from behind the counter and tilted it against his
lips. "Small ay? Small and naked and full of bile?"

The Governor nodded.

"Then you're poisoned, lad," said the juggler heartily. "You'll never
be happy with the other kind again. O the lovelies, the darlings, the
dainty morsels: they'll cut out your heart, eat your liver, pluck your
eyeballs from your skull, bless them."

"But," said Lampley, distressed, "surely it doesn't have to be that
way?"

"Surely, surely," said the juggler.

Lampley bit his lip. "How does one get out of here?"

"Hush," cautioned the juggler. "I have a map. It was traced by the
seventh son of a seventh son and lent me under the strictest pledge of
secrecy, sealed in black goat's blood. Come along with me." He led
the way to the back of the store, through a passage papered in bright
orange, the sheets curling apart at the edges where the glue had dried.
It was barely wide enough to squeeze through sideways.

The room was triangular, with a pile of brass cogwheels in the
narrowest corner. A set of bookshelves sagged against one wall.
Calf-bound folios leaned on spiral-backed notebooks. In disorder on top
was a collection of papers. The juggler reached among them and took out
a thick roll tied with withered pink tape. "Here," he whispered. "Read
it and memorize it. Never say who showed it to you."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Governor unrolled the map. It showed an unfamiliar, an unlikely,
a visionary coast. Mermaids and dolphins frisked in the seas; the
shoreline was blank, labelled _Terra incognita inferioris_.

"Guess that will fix you up, ay lad?" boomed the juggler. "It's not
everybody I'd show it to."

"I'm sure of that," said Lampley. "Thank you."

"Just don't let on to anybody," cautioned the juggler. "Not even if
they torture you for it."

"I won't," promised Lampley.

"Think of me," begged the juggler. "Pray for me."

The Governor did not investigate the third shop. He walked past it to
the ramp leading to the street. Outside the station the roof of the
city pressed down so close buildings of four stories barely cleared
it. The street was wide and paved with cobblestones; brilliant copper
trolleywires ran overhead.

The city was familiar to Lampley, he had lived in it, knew the names
of its quarters and districts. He began walking toward the harbor, the
picture of it forming before him, the dark olive water, the black ships
suddenly looming up, the tiny figures on the docks, the slowly creaking
pilings. The harbor was miles away; miles and miles and miles away.

He passed block after block of gray stone, massive, empty somber
buildings. A skeleton came out of one and thrust a dented tin cup
before him. The Governor dropped in a coin. It went through the cup
and rolled into a gutter running with chaff-flecked dirty water. The
skeleton got down on its hands and knee bones to search for it.

A streetcar, royal blue, creaked and whined by. Lampley knew it was
headed for the docks also, its passengers stevedores and sailors. A
green trolley passed it going in the opposite direction. The motormen
saluted each other by clanging their bells in the beat of _Old Black
Joe_.

Lampley passed under a gray stone arch spanning the street from
building to building. Atop the arch were severed heads of a bear,
camel, dog, elephant, ox, weasel. He dropped a coin in the slot
and twirled a prayerwheel set up here to help speed the decapitated
creatures to a new incarnation.

Beyond the arch, kleiglights focussed on a supermarket. Like the
street, it was deserted. The endless shelves held empty cans, their
ragged lids sticking cockily upward. The refrigerators were crowded
with milk and pop bottles with nothing in them. Unattended cash
registers rang NO SALE over and over. Vegetable bins contained carrot
tops, potato peels, orange skins, apple cores, cherry stones, peach
pits, bean strings, pea-pods, squash seeds, melon rinds. At the butcher
counter cellophane bags of fat, gristle, bones and sinews were neatly
stacked between trays of clamshells, fish scales, frogs' heads, chicken
beaks. Lampley walked on.

He came to a cross-street with an arc-lamp on each corner--white,
violet, gray, reaching into the blackness. He knew it was always night
in this city, and he thought of the hundreds of thousands of its
inhabitants who worked by day, condemned to a bedridden, insomniac
existence. A red streetcar clattered through the intersection, the
wires overhead throwing long, shattering sparks as the trolleywheel hit
the break, reconnected, glided on.

In the next block there was a cellar with a sign COAL & ICE. The cellar
was lit. The Governor peered down at a griffin, its wings folded neatly
back, its arrowhead tail tucked away, shoveling crushed ice into a
roaring furnace, pausing only to fill a refrigerator with dusty lumps
of coal. The building which housed the cellar was divided by a lane
which descended in long, shallow, stone-flagged steps. This arcade was
lined with booths, small and open. Some contained iron white enameled
beds with coverlets thrown back to show wrinkled sheets and indented
pillows, barberchairs adjusted for immediate occupancy, office desks
with letters and forms lying on them, bar stools drawn cosily up to
bamboo counters, mechanical pants-pressers steaming, open and ready
to crease a pair of trousers. There were booths of sheepskins and
parchments with the laureate's name blank, certifying every known
degree and honor. There were others containing family bibles and
photograph albums, dining tables set with silver and napery, bathtubs
full of hot water on whose surface floated cakes of soap and scrubbing
brushes.

       *       *       *       *       *

He came to the end of the arcade and stood at another wide street,
listening to the night noises of the city. A yellow streetcar stopped
beside him. The Governor climbed aboard. There was no conductor, no
passengers, no motorman. The straw seats were misshapen, cracked and
bristly but the brasswork on them and the doors and windows was all
fresh and polished. He walked to the front of the car. The sign above
his head read .VA TTAW AIV YAWOAT :OWT He jerked the control knob over
the graduated notches. The car bucketed along the street.

       *       *       *       *       *

The street became two streets, encircling a great, round building whose
hundreds of mean and mocking windows were heavily barred. In front of
the building was an imposing statue, carved in the same gray stone used
throughout the city. Inside the prison were thousands of wretches,
dirty, scabby, verminous, starving; thousands of convicts pacing,
twitching, planning, calculating, remembering; thousands of convicts
behind bland walls, condemned to smell their own bodies and the caustic
chemicals, to feed on themselves and refuse, on hate, despair, foolish
slyness.

The Governor left the car and beat his hands against the prison. He
shouted defiance at the warden, the guards, turnkeys, stoolpigeons,
trustys within. He picked up a piece of chalk and tried to write on the
impervious, rugged stone. The chalk crumbled before he got beyond FR.

Outraged past bearing, he turned away, brushed by the statue. The
figure was two stories high. On the base the letters stood out,
shadowed by the street lights. GOVERNOR ALMON LAMPLEY. He ran back
to the car as though pursued, his heart beating anxiously. He
swung the knob; the car rattled between empty warehouses, lonesome
flats, deserted homes. The arc-lights here were a deeper violet, the
pavingstones took on a greenish tinge.

He entered the quarter where the foreign consulates were, each with its
coat-of-arms carefully emblazoned above the doorway, the flagstaffs
bare, windowpanes shattered and broken. After them came professional
offices in houses hesitating between being homes or not-homes:
dentists, pimps, doctors, mediums, occultists, fortune-tellers,
literary agents, optometrists, dowsers, narcotics peddlers, osteopaths,
contest-promoters, burglars, chiropractors, librarians, counterfeiters,
attorneys, tea-tasters, educators, graphologists, architects,
lapidaries, phrenologists.

He came to where narrow shops hunched against each other, none with
entrances, each with a window for their shop-worn, mildewed goods:
the folds of cloth faded and dingy, the hardware corroded and rusty,
the books brittle and dogseared, the bottles fallen and crazed. He
passed theaters where marquees, caught between changes, spelled out
unintelligible attractions, created hermaphrodite stars. He passed
filling-stations with hoseless pumps, radio-towers without antennae.

He took the trolley through quiet, quiet streets where all the houses
spoke with assurance of sleepers within, of babies fed and diapered,
dry and unprotesting, of adolescents on their stomachs and young girls
curled into knots, of lovers lying face to face and married couples
back to back. He passed shuttered houses, and those with the front door
opened in welcome; houses with the porchlight left on for the expected
visitor, and houses heavy with gloom and repulse. He passed open
spaces: vacant lots, cramped parks, areas being excavated.

The street entered a more modern part of the city. The buildings were
still of gray stone but here it was more smoothly, more fashionably
dressed. There was not one which didn't reach to the roof of the
city or embody the horizontal lines of the currently popular style.
He halted the car before the department store which alone thrust its
height through the city's enclosing shell and rose, who knew how many
stories above it.

It had been remodelled over and over again yet it was still familiar
to Lampley as the rest of the city: gray, massive, frowning. Oil lamps
with dented reflectors behind them illuminated the show-windows. The
Governor reached up and wound the route sign till it read, .HTUOM
HTOMMAM-MUTOT XOV :TIAW. He lifted the control handle from its square
nut and stuck it in the conductor's coinbox. He swung down the steps
and stood under the portico of the store, gazing into each window in
turn.

One displayed a single egg on a pedestal draped in black velvet
that had turned green and purple. Another contained burred screws,
threadless bolts, spectacles and eyeglasses with important parts
lacking. In the next, women washed clothes in galvanized tubs,
scrubbing them against metal washboards, ironing them with sadirons.
One of them, stringy gray hair lank on fat shoulders, came forward and
pressed her open mouth, like a pig's snout, against the glass. Her
teeth were long and jagged, her tongue pale and coated, the inside of
her lips spotted with sores. She pulled up her draggled skirt to reveal
bunion-shaped shoes and wrinkled black stockings, dancing with bumps
and grinds.

       *       *       *       *       *

He moved slowly past the window crammed with foxed lithographs, broken
crockery, disabled bedsprings, a garbage can where a banana lolled
from under the lid like a dog's tongue, to the window where a dentist,
aided by an ingenious arrangement of mirrors, drilled his own teeth. At
intervals he paused, drew a hypodermic needle from his pantspocket and
squirted at a canvas on an easel. The artist who stood idly beating a
mahl-stick against an open palm, leapt to the easel, working furiously
until the paint discharged from the syringe was used up, then sank
back into lethargy till the act was repeated and he had a fresh batch
of color to use. He was painting a picture of Almon Lampley in track
clothes, running for office.

       *       *       *       *       *

Instead of a revolving door at the entrance there was a merry-go-round.
The Governor stepped aboard and bestrode one of the horses, thrusting
his feet into stirrups which were too short and brought his knees
too high. The wooden steed, instead of moving gracefully up and down
in time to the music of the calliope, bucked and reared. Lampley was
glad to dismount and cling to a brass pole. A figure in motorman's
uniform--the Governor knew it was his yellow streetcar he had
driven--climbed aboard briskly and began collecting fares. He wore a
monocle in his left eye on which was etched the island under the earth
as seen from the farther shore.

"I'm only trying to get into the store," explained the Governor,
unwilling to pay.

"The store. To be sure," said the motorman, as though he had just
realized what was beyond the carrousel. "History, ethics, philology,
chemistry, geography, heraldry, propaganda, celestial mechanics?
A streamlined, up-to-date, late model, trouble-free, labor-saving
philosophers' stone? How about the small, extravagant pocket-size for
a willion gold moidores? I'm offered a willion; who'll say a stillion,
a crillion--a fillion even? Come now, ladies and gentlemen, horses,
giraffes (camelopards, if you prefer), ostriches and zebras, surely
a fillion moidores is little enough for a love-magnet, a cap of
invisibility, or a bottomless purse? Let me hear a fillion. Going once,
going twice, going up?"

The calliope played, _In the Good Old Summertime_. "Going up," said
Lampley firmly.

"Ah," muttered the motorman, hanging his head. "I was afraid of that."
He removed the monocle and crushed it under his heel. The eye behind it
was glass. The merry-go-round tilted, sliding Lampley off onto a floor
of absorbent cotton sprinkled with tinsel flakes. The calliope switched
to _It Had to Be You_. Two Santa Clauses arrived, lugging a barrel.
They grasped Lampley under his arms and shoved him into the barrel,
jamming his knees against his chest. They rolled the barrel along the
floor and up an incline, then they righted it. The staves opened like
a flower. Lampley stood erect on the bed of a horse-drawn wagon. The
store was full of wax dummies engaged in copulation.

A tophatted, nightshirted man on stilts marched through, carrying a
pickaxe over his shoulder. He attacked a section of the wall with the
pick. After a few strokes water gushed forth, sweeping the dummies
away. The man took a blowtorch from under his hat and froze the water
on the floor. A motion-picture projector threw colored images of fleecy
blue and pink clouds. An organ played _O Promise Me_ (pianissimo) while
handholding couples skated tirelessly over the ice.

The Governor jumped from the wagon, and avoiding the irregular edges of
the ice, walked over to the stationery department. A mahout in turban
and loincloth pecked at the keys of a typewriter with his goad. Each
time the machine came to the end of a line a balloon emerged from the
side, inflated slowly, floated up out of sight. Lampley cleared his
throat. "Could you tell me the way to the elevators?"

The mahout whacked the typewriter with his goad. Balloons issued like
bubbles in an aquarium tank. They clustered together in midair to
spell WHATEVER GOES DOWN COMES UP. Lampley spied a floorwalker doing a
handstand on a cash register. "Could you--" he began.

The floorwalker sprang down nimbly, folding his arms. He took the
carnation from his buttonhole and held it between his teeth. He punched
the keys of the register. Three plums appeared. He punched them again;
four lemons jumped into sight. He rang up, IOUOI. He handed the receipt
slip to the Governor with a low bow. It read, THE AMOUNT OF YOUR
PURCHASE IS $00.00. THANK YOU; YOU ARE ENTITLED TO A REFUND. Lampley
turned it over. On the other side was printed, YOUR WEIGHT IS 181
POUNDS. YOU WILL BE LUCKY IF YOU AVOID.

The Governor dropped the card and went to the bank of elevators. The
doors slammed open, one of the clowns he had seen at the terminal
stuck his head out. "Foreign tongues, quartermelons, odd fish,
rooter-beggars, soft hearts, hot potatoes, proud flesh, birds of a
feather, prime movers, mushrooms, red herrings! Going GUP!"

"Please," said the Governor.

The clown opened his painted mouth and wabbled it. Then he fell out of
the elevator on his face. Lampley stepped around him into the cage.
The clown picked himself up, his feet slipping from under him again,
threatening a pratfall, so that he had to keep his legs whirling to
maintain balance. He sneezed. His mask flew off to uncover the clerk's
face. "You're keeping the doctor waiting; hurry, hurry, hurry." He
closed the door, snapped it open. "Out," he said sternly, threatening
the Governor with one of his clown's flapping shoes.




                               CHAPTER 6


The vaulted ceiling of the windowless waiting room was upheld by
romanesque pillars. It was so low Lampley could have touched it without
stretching his arms to the full. Dirt had worked its way into every
unevenness of the whitewashed surface. Unshaded bulbs stabbed his eyes.
A girl sat in an armchair, rolling and unrolling a magazine. A woman in
her thirties pulled at her glossy black hair; when a strand came loose
she tucked it back under her hat, then pulled at it again. A row of
plastic mannequins, smiling, dressed in blouses and hats with veils but
skirtless and unshod, were wedged tightly together on a long bench. The
Governor looked for a vacant seat; there was none.

The thick whitewash on the ceiling and pillars constantly flaked off,
falling in a fine, dusty powder on the limp carpet, to be trodden by
nervous feet. Lampley scraped a short semicircle with the toe of his
shoe; the layer was very deep. A mouse came out of the wall and stood
in the middle of the floor. No one paid any attention. A white cat
with black and orange patches prowled past, rubbed itself against the
Governor's leg, saw the mouse and crouched, tail lashing. The mouse
scuttled for its hole; the cat pounced--too late. It mewed pitifully.

       *       *       *       *       *

An elderly nurse entered the waiting room. Her cap was perched on hair
dyed butter yellow, her hound's cheeks had bull's-eyes of rouge on the
bones, her down-turned mouth was unevenly lipsticked in raspberry red.
"Doctor will see you now," she announced.

The girl and woman jumped up. The nurse walked past them. "Me?" asked
Lampley.

She wheeled about; he followed her. The girl took the woman's seat and
began fussing with her hair; the woman sank into the girl's chair and
rolled the magazine. The dummies' eyes crinkled and winked behind their
veils; they had no mouths.

The nurse led him through a cracked and splintered door, the frame
eaten by termites and dry rot. She swished her stiff skirt down a hall
smelling of anaesthetics, dried blood, food cooked and forgotten. The
plaster was cracked and bulging, seemingly held in place by the thick,
greasy paint. The hall opened on a dressing room with triple-mirrored
vanity-table. Cotton smocks of varying lengths hung on hooks. "Put on a
gown please," she ordered.

"But I...."

She gave him an arch look. "You wouldn't expect Doctor to do your
little work while you had your clothes on, now, would you? Come,
dear--there's no use being shy at this stage. And let's not keep Doctor
waiting; Doctor's a busy man."

She drew the curtain behind her; it was glossy-green with the word
PULLMAN stitched to it. The Governor slowly took off his jacket, tie
and shirt. There was a calendar on the wall, a calendar for the year
he had gone into politics, after he and Mattie had been married for
eighteen months. The picture was of an abnormally short-torsoed girl
saying, "Let's have fun!"

Lampley selected the longest gown. It was not only too short, the edges
were grimed. He put it on and pulled the curtain aside. The nurse said,
"Let's not be nervous, dear. If you'd seen as many as I have come in
to have their little work done you wouldn't think any more of it than
brushing your teeth. I've had it done myself a dozen or two times. This
way, please."

       *       *       *       *       *

She preceded him into a grim office. Blue skies and flowering trees
were painted on the glass of closed windows. There was a gray operating
table under floodlights, and an oak desk with mustard-colored streaks.
A man with a sharp nose, close-clipped gray mustache, large, cloudy
spectacles sat behind the desk, looking over pads, pencils, ash-trays
and a portable radio. A wilted rose was thrust into a buttonhole of
his nylon smock. Two younger nurses leaned their elbows on the table,
intent only on their animated conversation.

"Now then," said the doctor, putting his hands behind his head and
tilting back. "Let's take a little case history, shall we?"

"There's nothing wrong with me," stated the Governor.

The younger nurses tittered, the older one patted him on the shoulder.
"That's the spirit, dear."

The doctor murmured, "It's just a formality, you know."

"But I don't know," argued the Governor.

The doctor looked annoyed. "Let's not waste time." All three nurses
agreed in unison, "Let's not waste Doctor's time. There are twenty
girls waiting to have their little work done."

The radio played, _Take Me Out to the Ball Game_.

"Forty," snapped the doctor.

"Forty," echoed the nurses. "Forty girls waiting to have their little
work done. If you knew how grateful they were to Doctor, you wouldn't
waste Doctor's time."

"But--" began the Governor.

"Enough!" shouted the doctor, standing up. "I can't stand these silly
creatures who chop and change."

"Doctor is the only one entitled to chop and change," admonished the
elderly nurse.

The doctor came from behind the desk. "Are we ready?"

"Yes, Doctor."

The radio played _Anchors Aweigh_.

"Then let's get it over with."

They grabbed his wrists and ankles. He did not struggle. They hoisted
him on the table; a needle pierced his arm. "Just relax, dear," advised
the elderly nurse.

Lampley grew helpless. He tried to raise his arms; he rolled his eyes.
The doctor said, "Nice going. Very nice. Now then."

A frightful stab of pain went through him. Then a worse one, more
prolonged, probing, searching. He tried to scream but his mouth
wouldn't open, his larynx and diaphragm refused response. The pain was
beyond bearing: sharp, hot, slashing, searing through his abdomen,
forking through kidneys, lungs, heart, throat.

"Ha-ha, nothing to it," chortled the doctor.

"Not when _you_ do it, Doctor," cried all three nurses together.

"Shall we put it under the microscope and see what it was?" asked the
doctor jovially.

"Oh, yes, Doctor, do," responded the nurses.

       *       *       *       *       *

They left him. Lampley felt the blood gushing from the wound in his
body, heard the pulse in his neck grow faint. Weakness didn't diminish
his pain, only made him less able to bear it. He judged the anaesthetic
was wearing off; he moved dry tongue against cracked lips. If not for
the loss of blood and the drag of pain he might be able to raise his
arms, or at least turn his head to see what they were doing.

"A boy," said the doctor. "One little assistant less."

The nurses cackled. "Oh, Doctor, you're so witty. You're a regular
killer."

The older nurse came over to the table and took the Governor's hand.
"How do we feel?" she inquired perfunctorily, "now our little work is
all done?"

Lampley groaned.

"Never better, ay? Well, girls will be girls, I always say. Once you've
had your little work done you're good as new till next time. Shall we
get dressed now?"

"Wa-water," moaned the Governor.

The radio played a medley of _Jingle Bells_, _Tea for Two_, _Smoke Gets
in Your Eyes_, _St. James Infirmary_, and _April Showers_.

"A little water? All right, dear. Just come with me." She helped him
off the table without solicitude. The pain came in dull, hard thrusts.
His mind crawled in disparate ways, a spider whose legs writhed,
though the body had been transfixed. He could move but he had trouble
controlling his movements. He put one foot very carefully before the
other and leaned on the nurse as she guided him back to the dressing
room. "You can rest if you like," she offered brightly. "But not tooooo
long, because there are others waiting for their little work. Doctor is
a very busy man, you know."

He clutched the edge of the vanity; the face three times reflected in
the mirrors was unchanged: the well-groomed, almost handsome, dignified
yet twinkling, lightly aged, thoughtful but friendly face of the
state's chief executive and first magistrate. He turned away in shame
and horror.

Shakily, he got out of the smock, letting it lie in a wrinkled,
blood-spotted, ugly pile. He stood, cowering a little, waiting for the
agony, the fire inside him, to recede before he slowly, so slowly, put
on his clothes. Leaning against the wall, he endured the spasmodic
cramps. He saw that the calendar was gone; in its place was the bright
cover of a seed catalogue. The curtain was now marked, BOX F.

The hall was a round tunnel pervaded by an overpowering smell.
Spiralling ridges, set close together, reflected a dizzying light
whose source he could not see. He stooped slightly to avoid the ridges
above his head. Walking was awkward but--apart from the pain--not too
difficult. He tried to identify the smell, familiar and not unpleasant
though strong, but he could not. He put his hand against the grooves,
somehow expecting them to be warm and moist; they were dry and cold.

His head brushed the roof, forcing him to crouch. After a short
distance he had to stoop still further, then crawl on hands and knees.
The peculiar effect of the reflected light--as though he were looking
through the inside of a tightly compressed corkscrew--hurt his eyes.
He shut them; this only made the pressure against his flesh more
noticeable. He opened them again.

He could no longer crawl; he had to wriggle slowly forward. A bright
ball of light far ahead dimmed the sinuous windings around him. He
was sure it indicated an opening too small for him to get through. He
bitterly regretted not having stretched his arms ahead of him while the
size of the tunnel still allowed it. He progressed by digging in the
toes of his shoes for a forward push, aided by arching his back. His
shirt was wet with sweat; jagged flashes shot through his head.

He was exhausted, unable to move farther. The cessation of movement, of
effort, did not ease him or recruit his strength to go on. He dared not
give up, relax, slacken his will. He was condemned to go on and on,
to bruise himself against the ever-narrowing passage. The necessity to
complete the journey had been ordained before he was born. There was
nothing to do but force himself to shrink even more tightly together,
to compress his rebellious body into the prescribed space.

The pipe debouched partway up on a wall; the Governor looked down upon
a brightly polished floor of inlaid wood. A large area was enclosed
within barbed-wire entanglements, guarded by unmanned machine guns.
Beyond this area the normal business of the department store proceeded:
customers strolled through aisles of merchandise, salespeople waited on
them; between the two societies was bare floor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Inside the wire enclosure tombstones were displayed, voting machines,
parking meters, printing presses, atom bombs, wireless masts, garbage
trucks, spaceships, oil derricks, semaphores, gas pumps, power shovels,
parachutes, purse seins, burglar tools, cyclotrons, glass eyes, a
stuffed whale, medals and orders of chivalry and nobility. Closely
shaven men in dark blue, dark gray, dark brown suits, neck microphones
resting on their hand-painted ties, traded these things to each
other--a truck for a net, a medal for a gravestone.

In the exact center of the enclosure, suspended from the ceiling, an
electric signboard offered quotations which moved slowly along from
right to left, allowing the slowest reader time to grasp them. BONE
TOOLS 37 ... CONSOLIDATED ALCHEMISTS 104 ... INTERSTELLAR DRIVE PREF
66 ... CSA BONDS #5 ... UNITED METROPOLITAN HOT CRUMPET & PUNCTUAL
DELIVERY LTD 70....

One of the presses began turning, the paper flashing by on the
cylinders in an endless stream. As they were spewed out and
automatically cut and folded, the headlines were large enough for the
Governor to read. LAMPLEY NOMINATED said the top one. A broker seized
and stamped on it. GOVERNOR FAILS TO GET NOD read the one below, then
in rapid succession, GOVERNOR'S OPPONENTS IN UNITY BID, CONVENTION
DEADLOCK, LAMPLEY SWEEPS PRIMARIES, LAMPLEY SWAMPED IN PRIMARIES,
THREE-CORNERED NOVEMBER RACE SEEN.

One of the brokers retrieved LAMPLEY NOMINATED and held up the smudged
paper. Someone bid the stuffed whale. They slapped each other on the
back, they fell into each other's arms helplessly, they rolled on the
floor in ungovernable laughter after putting on coveralls to protect
their clothes, they drew revolvers from hip-pockets and shot them into
the air, stamping and rollicking in mirth. When delight at the jape
finally died down, a broker offered, LAMPLEY SWEEPS PRIMARIES. There
were no takers.

The illuminated ticker jerked in its hitherto smooth run. LAMPLEY 41
... DEHYDRATED AARDVARK 88 ... UNITED ARBALEST & HARQUEBUS 90 ...
LAMPLEY 40 ... MONTGOLFIER AERONAUTICS 284 ... EAST INDIA CO GE ...
LAMPLEY 39 ... SPACE DOGS & GENERAL MUTANTS 368 ... ENGLISH CHANNEL
TUBE 111 ... LAMPLEY 37 ... HERO'S ALEXANDRIA STEAM POWER DEVELOPMENT
104 ... MARTIAN SUBDIVISIONS 208 ... LAMPLEY 35....

       *       *       *       *       *

A broker pointed his finger at the Governor. He would have shrunk back;
the smallness of the tube forbade it. All the traders lined up and
stared at him through binoculars. The signboard speeded up:
LAMPLEY 32 ... LAMPLEY 29 ... LAMPLEY 21 ... LAMPLEY 14 ... LAMPLEY
9 ... LAMPLEY 1 ... LAMPLEY....

"Yah!" they shouted in chorus. "You'd have to pay us to take you."

"Pay us! Pay us!"

Each put a hand on the shoulder in front. They snake-danced around
and between the displays. The signboard began spelling out, BORN IN A
HOSPITAL, OF AVERAGE INCOME BUT NOTABLY IMPROVIDENT PARENTS, HE EARLY
SHOWED THE APTITUDES CALCULATED TO PUT HIM IN SECOND PLACE AT ALL
TIMES. Oil began gushing up through the derricks and splashing on the
floor. The smelting furnaces produced gold bricks. The stuffed whale's
seams burst to show it was filled with stocks and bonds, promissory
notes, mortgages, checks, bankbooks and trust deeds. The signboard
read, UNIQUE SPECTACLE: GOVERNOR PUFFED WHEAT WILL NOW BE SHOT FROM THE

He felt the tremendous pressure building up behind him, tried to
resist, gave up. The men below stood at attention, their right hands
placed reverently against their left breasts. The Governor soared over
their heads in a wide arc, above busy departments and dark, still
spaces. He found he could control his flight, made a neat immelmann
turn, and came gently to rest on a balcony overlooking the florist
department. Scent of frangipani, orange blossoms, cereus, honeysuckle,
liana floated up to him. Orchids bloomed in midair, lilies blossomed on
plants rooted in the grass mats bestrewed over the floor.

The balcony was cluttered with anchor-chains, spools of telephone
conduit, cotton bales, spare parts for mechanical chess-players.
Lampley trod carefully between them and opened a door marked NO
ADMITTANCE, SERVICE ONLY, DO NOT ENTER, THIS MEANS YOU. The room had
no proper floor, only closely woven flat steel strips which sagged at
every step. Enlarged X-ray photographs lined the walls; light shone
through them to show up the deformed bones like parachutes, like plows,
like cutlasses. The clerk, wearing an admiral's gold-laced cocked
hat and the black robes of a judge over his blue jeans, sat in a
porch swing that swayed gently to and fro behind a pulpit. He looked
inquiringly at the Governor.

"Why did you take me to that doctor?" demanded Lampley.

The clerk shrugged and took a pinch of snuff. He sneezed. "Why did you
go?"

Lampley pondered. "You forced me," he said at last.

The clerk plucked a dry weed from a candlestick on the pulpit and
chewed it thoroughly. "You didn't resist."

"I--I was taken by surprise," stammered Lampley.

"There are no accidents."

"But--"

"And there is free will," affirmed the clerk drowsily, the swing almost
stopped.

"I didn't go voluntarily."

The clerk opened his eyes wide. "Mmm. Also mmmmm."

"I--" The Governor was unable to say more.

       *       *       *       *       *

The clerk stood up in the swing, reaching out his arms to the chains
and began pumping with his feet. The swing cleared the pulpit, knocked
over the candlestick, which bounced on the steel floor. He let go the
chain, folded his arms. The swing subsided into gentle motion. The
clerk jumped down and brought up a heavy lawbook from under the pulpit.
He laid it open on the lectern, riffling through it. Several moths flew
out from between the pages. "You plead not guilty?" he asked coldly.

"I don't understand."

"You plead non compos parentis, in loco ignoramus, ab squatulatis
feasance, nolo comprendere?"

"That's nonsense," exclaimed the Governor.

"Certainly. Convicted in the thirty-third degree."

"I demand a suspended sentence."

"Granted," accorded the clerk, lying on the swing again, face down, so
that his voice was muffled. "Now then! You insist the responsibility
wasn't yours?"

"What's the use of going into that?"

The clerk sat up and adjusted his hat from the Napoleonic tilt it had
assumed when he was prone to the proper fore-and-aft position. "The
defendant is instructed that evasion is paramount to tutti-frutti.
Answer the question or be incontemptible."

"It wasn't my idea," said the Governor sullenly.

"You consented, however."

"I 'consented'? Was she some chattel who needed dispensation from me?"

The clerk shook his finger.

"I actually tried to persuade her not to do it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The clerk tore several pages out of the book and constructed an
airplane. It flew silently over their heads, dropping leaflets a
quarter the size of postage-stamps. The Governor tried to control his
nervous shrinking. "It wasn't as if she were a silly girl. I mean, it
was a considered decision on her part--nothing frivolous or vain...."

His voice trailed off. The clerk tore out another page and made a
cannon. He shot a wing off the plane with it; the machine whirled down
lopsidedly and crashed on the pulpit. "If that's the way you want it,
that's the way you want it. Let's go."

"Where to?"

"Ah," said the clerk; "If we only knew." He removed the cocked hat and
black robe and dropped them in a wastebasket. He pressed a button on
the pulpit which immediately swung aside to reveal a manhole. A ladder
rose out of the depths in short jerks. As it neared the ceiling a
trapdoor fell open. The ladder glided through and stopped. "You first,"
said the clerk.

Lampley climbed the ladder, feeling he might lose his hold on the
rungs at any step. When he was almost to the top he looked down.
The clerk had disappeared. Carpenters were laying a wooden floor,
erecting partitions. Porters removed the swing and the pulpit. Wiring,
air-conditioning, telephones, interoffice communication-systems, were
installed rapidly. One of the workers took up an ax and began chopping
at the ladder.

Lampley climbed through the floor. He was in a court with squat walls,
and gateways wider at the bottom than the top, bearing winged suns.
He passed between rows of statues, animal-headed gods, men and women
wearing conventionalized wigs and beards in stylized poses. The pale
light gave the reds, greens and blues which predominated, a chalky,
muffled quality; it threw the looped crosses molded on the frieze into
shadowed relief.

The air was dank with the penetrating, pervasive dampness of oozing
stone. Lampley was oppressed by thoughts of decay and destruction, of
the knowledge without the sensation of pain. He longed for the warmth
of the sun outside the hotel or the climate of the island under the
earth. He shuddered away from the hidden corners, suggestive of toads
and snakes, small animals decomposing and maggoty. This place should
have had some measure of sanctity, induced some feelings of reverence
or at least contemplation. He was aware only of the sodden air.

       *       *       *       *       *

He walked moodily from the dusky precincts into the shocking light of
a busy office. Girls in tight pink nylon bathing suits, their hair
dyed royal blue, wearing blue nail polish, blue lipstick and red eye
shadow, sat at transparent plastic desks, inserting thin rectangles of
Swiss cheese into tabulating machines. Each desk had a silver champagne
ice bucket in which rested a telephone. Beside the machines a row of
feather dusters in graduated sizes were arranged in neat holders.
Lampley saw pretzels were being used as paper clips.

"Pardon me," he said. "Is this the accounting department?"

The four nearest girls looked up in panic. Alarm bells rang shrilly,
rockets popped out of the centers of the feather dusters, fire
sprinklers showered down rainbowed sparks. The pretzels unwound limply.
The slices of Swiss cheese curled into rolls out of which confetti blew
in continuous blasts.

A girl pulled her phone out of the ice bucket and choked herself by
winding the cord around and around her throat. The next one reached in
her desk for a pair of waterwings, inflated them and began practicing
the breast stroke. Others mutely handed him sheaf after sheaf of
statements, loading them on his reflexively outstretched arms until the
top ones slid off onto the floor. He could see they were made out to
him but he had no chance to read the items or prices.

They piled the bills faster and faster; girls came from the farthest
desks, staggered under armfuls. He dumped what he was holding and
tried to struggle free from the mounting heap but it was already above
his waist; he could not get his legs loose. He dug with his hands;
the papers slipped down to cram the holes as fast as he dug. They
imprisoned him with their weight; first the left, then the right arm
was pinned to his side.

Buried to the chin, he filled his lungs with air, foreseeing the
covering of his mouth and nose. The pressure was painful now; he felt
his ribs slowly caving in. The deluge ceased; the girl who had choked
herself wormed her way to him on her belly, creeping up the paper
mound, dragging the telephone behind her. She pressed her swollen,
twisted, blackened tongue against his lips, looked into his eyes with
her protruding glazed ones.

He wrenched his face away. Girls approached with rubber stamps so large
they could barely lift the bulbous handles. As they were raised he
read DIAP on their dark purple surfaces. The girls hurled and slashed
them downward, biting into the bills. With each thump masses of paper
vanished. His arms were disengaged, then his legs. He breathed deeply,
took a step, leaving only scattered invoices on the floor.

The girls threw themselves at his feet. "Take us," they moaned, "use
us, violate us, degrade us. We love you."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Governor shuddered as he perceived they were all sisters, product
of a multiple birth; in each face he saw the features of the strangled
girl. The one with the waterwings, using a crawl, swam rapidly
between the others and raised her clasped hands imploringly. She was
drowning. He rolled her over and began clumsily giving her artificial
respiration. Her hair gradually turned white, the blue dye floating in
a powdery cloud above her head. He put the valve of the waterwings to
her mouth and expressed the air. She opened her eyes.

"Let us go," she said.

The others protested, weeping, clasping and unclasping their hands,
tearing at their bathing suits in anguish, clutching their throats in
grief, but they did not try to hold him. He helped the white-haired
girl to her feet. She drew a key from between her breasts and handed
it to him. He put it in his pocket and they left the office. As soon
as they were outside her hair changed to brown, the pink bathing suit
became white, her nail polish, lipstick and eye-shadow faded. She
shivered.

"Are you cold?" She nodded. "We must find something to put around you."

There was no one in sight. This part of the store had an air of
neglect, as though it had been used for storage, shut up and forgotten.
The showcases looked as though they had been discarded from more
enterprising sections; they were of odd sizes, with dull glass, in some
cases cracked and repaired. Many were empty, others contained pearls,
loose toothpicks, used cartridge cases, false teeth, celluloid collars,
oil cans, rare stamps.

They came to an escalator powered by two ponies working a treadmill,
and rode to the floor above. A floorwalker in morning clothes,
binoculars dangling on his chest from a leather strap, hastened to
them. "Customers only, customers only," he barked.

"We're looking for a coat or a cloak," the Governor informed him.

"Nothing but mink or sables here," said the floorwalker coldly,
surveying them through the binoculars.

"We'll take either," said Lampley.

The floorwalker knelt and kissed the Governor's shoe. He reached behind
him and took the tails of his frockcoat in his fingers and tore it up
the back, placing the two halves before their feet. A saleswoman with
a diamond collar sparkling on her neck rolled up in a motor scooter.
"This way, if you please."

Two grapnels emerged from the scooter and hooked on to the pieces
of coat; Lampley and the girl rode them like water skis to a small,
shallow auditorium. An old-fashioned carrier system hummed overhead,
its wire baskets moving briskly back and forth, disappearing above the
proscenium arch of a cramped stage on which models pranced and postured
in furs. When they turned rapidly, flirting the cloaks, Lampley saw
they wore nothing beneath and that they were all gravid.

"I'll take that one," said the girl, pointing.

The curtain thumped down. The saleswoman pulled a cord on the carrier
system. "Madam has excellent taste, for a slut," she complimented the
girl. An oversized basket brought the model clutching the cloak tightly
about her. She was cowering in terror. The saleswoman pulled the cord
again and the basket tipped, tumbling the model out. "Rip it off her
back," she ordered.

The model cried out. "Oh, wait. Please wait," she begged.

"You beast," said the saleswoman. "You pretty little female beast. What
rights have you? What feelings have you? You were born for this moment."

The model moaned.

"Is there no other way?" asked the Governor.

The saleswoman stared at him. "How could there be? This isn't the place
for cheap merchandise or cheap methods." She gave the order again.

       *       *       *       *       *

The model sank to the floor in a trembling heap. "The poor thing," said
the girl in the bathing suit. "Will it hurt her very much?"

"What difference does it make?" asked the saleswoman. "It'll be over
before you know it. And there are plenty of other models. All this
palaver over a wretched creature! It's disgusting."

"I can't do it," whispered the girl. "I'm too tender-hearted."

"Chicken-hearted, you mean," sneered the woman. "Anyone can see what
you are. All right, let him do it then."

"No," said the Governor firmly.

"You'll have to pay just the same," warned the woman.

"Very well." He drew the key from his pocket and handed it to her.

"And take your property with you."

The model walked humbly behind them. "Still cold?" asked Lampley.

"Yes I am. And if you were a gentleman you'd have seen that I got my
coat."

He didn't answer. The floorwalker, in a new frockcoat, bowed pleasantly
to them and waved them to the elevator. Lampley pressed the button,
noting that there was no indicator above, that there never had been
indicators over any of the elevator entrances. The thought depressed
him.

The doors rolled open. The cage was very large, with wide brown leather
benches around three sides, and a padded leather ceiling and walls.
The clerk wore a leather jockey cap, and a rawhide vest over his blue
jeans. He clasped his hands together over his head as they entered. He
closed the doors smartly; the elevator lurched sideways, throwing the
girl and model to the benches.

"I hope--" began Lampley.

The clerk nodded. "Excellent, excellent. Where there's hope there's
life and where there's life there's despair. A beginning, anyway."

"I meant I hoped--"

"Heard you," said the clerk. "Let's not say the same thing more than
once." The car stopped and he opened the doors. Lampley could see
nothing clearly through the clouds of steam outside. After a slight
hesitation the girl left, followed by the model. The Governor moved
after them; the clerk barred his way. "Ladies only," he said politely.

"You weren't so particular at the doctor's office," argued Lampley
angrily.

"Yang and Yin," explained the clerk. "Circumstances alter faces."

       *       *       *       *       *

The elevator shot upward. The noise of airhammers and riveting machines
grew loud; it was succeeded by the sounds of distant motors, wind
rustling in the trees, surf spuming against rocks, hooves clopping on
soft asphalt. "You want out here?" asked the clerk. "Or will you try
for a higher number?" Before the Governor could answer, the elevator
stopped. Lampley stepped out on linoleum with the pattern worn off, the
burlap backing showing through in streaks. A gloomy corridor, warm and
fetid, stretched ahead of him. He turned back to the elevator but the
doors were shut.

He paced along the corridor, past tarnished spittoons, sagging chairs,
earthenware umbrella stands. The saffron wallpaper hung in shaggy
strips, spiderwebs loaded with the dried chitin of insect victims
tied it to the pocked plaster. Tarnished metal signs exhorted, NO
SMOKING, DON'T SPIT ON THE FLOOR, SILENCE, NO WOMEN ALLOWED, FIREARMS
PROHIBITED, ACT LIKE YOUR MOTHER SAW YOU. The light bulbs were the
ancient carbon type; their filaments glowed an angry red through the
flawed, smeared glass.

He entered a room whose wooden walls were riddled with holes, the
remaining surfaces powdery and fragile, reeking with slime and foul
smells. Men lay on the floor in their own filth and vomit, their greasy
clothes clutched across thin chests, sagging bellies, protruding
Adam's apples. They quivered and twitched, squirmed and tossed, turned
on their sides and then on their backs. They moved their arms under
their uneasy heads, rolled over on them, jerked them up. They snored,
wheezed, gasped, cried out. They burrowed unshaven faces, heavy with
sores, scars, bloody cuts, into their elbows or against hunched
shoulders. The Governor picked his way between them as best he could,
anxious not to stumble, dreading to touch one of them with his foot.

At the end of the room an alabaster basin, perhaps twenty feet across,
was full to the brim with sewage. Gorged and sluggish flies hovered,
or lit briefly on bobbing orange-peels. He shuddered lest some tremor
of the floor, some unseen current of air cause the loathsome bog to
overflow and reach him.

He finished his cautious tour and entered a circular anteroom whose
sides were completely taken up by divans and easy-chairs upholstered in
faded green plush. Gas brackets curved outward from the walls, holding
fan-shaped yellow flames like halting palms. A chandelier was suspended
from the ceiling, its glass prisms and teardrops reflecting the violet
end of the spectrum. Below it was a round settee with a blunted cone
of upholstery rising in its center; the seat might have accommodated
twenty pairs of buttocks; no more than four shoulders could have found
space against the spindling back. This cone supported a cast-iron
statuette of an effeminate youth or a mannish girl--it was impossible
to tell which because of the chaste metallic drapery. There was no one
in the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Governor paused before the halls raying out from the anteroom. They
were all precisely alike, shadowed, somber, murky; he chose the center
one. The glow of kerosene lamps enshrined in recesses made pale brown
half moons on the mud-colored floor. He would not have been surprised
had the hall led to some cell from which there was no return, instead
it ended in another anteroom. This one was square, with board benches.
Fat candles on wooden stands slowly dripped wax; the floor was covered
with sawdust and shavings.

There was a row of double-hinged saloon doors reaching from knee to
shoulder. Lampley pushed through one. Sleepers were even more numerous
here, piled closer together, and their smell was more nauseating.
Some of the faces were rigid, lips drawn back in a snarl to uncover
noisome caverns. Others were mobile in sleep, grinning, grimacing,
teeth-grinding, cheek-puffing. Pale worms crawled out of one open mouth.

He recognized some of the sleepers. Playmates, school fellows, college
acquaintances, his first employer, merchants and farmers to whom he
had sold tractors or plows, political allies he had left behind, a
candidate he had ostensibly supported, a lobbyist to whom he had
promised his vote before he changed his mind, a legislator of the same
party whom he had disavowed, an office-seeker whom he had praised
with calculated faintness--a dozen others. He could remember the
names of none. He saw a man he was sure was his uncle, his mother's
brother, in whose home he had lived and who had sent him to school.
"Uncle--Uncle--" he stammered, but the name would not come. He stooped
to rouse the man, to beg him to tell his name, to relieve the burden
of forgetfulness. His uncle--if it was--slept on, knees drawn up, jaw
slack, fingers fluttering. Lampley's hands fell away from the recumbent
figure.

He hooded his eyes against the other faces, heeding only the legs
and bodies to keep himself from stumbling. He saw the treasures,
tokens, souvenirs, keepsakes the outcasts possessed, spilled from
their hands or pockets onto the crowded floor: curling photographs,
creased letters, cracked newspaper clippings, locks of lifeless hair,
tarnished luckpieces, battered amulets, illegible diplomas, crumpled
certificates.

The dormitory was surrounded by bathrooms of lustrous tile, milky
porcelain, harsh chrome fixtures. Men slept on the spotless floors,
in the immaculate tubs, draped themselves over lavatories and
close-stools. The one Lampley entered seemed less crowded than the
others. A figure on the floor struggled free of his companions. It was
the clerk. He closed the door and twisted the faucet in the bathtub.
The elevator shot upward.

"I don't seem to remember any of the names," apologized the Governor.

The clerk smiled tolerantly, then frowned. He turned the faucet hard
over; the elevator's speed became frightening. "There's forgetting and
forgetting," he said. "Anyway, you'll remember these."

"What?" asked Lampley.

"These," said the clerk. The elevator stopped with a jolt. The clerk
waved his hand. "Your floor."




                               CHAPTER 7


It was a telephone exchange, with minute light-buttons flashing on and
off. The switchboards were back-to-back; as the Governor walked slowly
along he could see only the operators opposite. They were all girls he
remembered poignantly, girls he had loved, whose images had filled
his mind, girls he had wanted, courted, thought about through restless
nights, girls he had been too timid, too awkward, too shy or inept to
have. There was not one whose name or voice or scent he had forgotten.
Sheila, whose spare, tanned body tormented his adolescence, smiled up
at him with those tantalizing lips, thin but so perfectly, so sweetly
curved. Beth, who swam and sailed and rode like a boy but constantly
reminded him she was a girl, waved a free hand as she plugged into the
board with the other. And there was Marge, Marge of the translucent
skin, and hair the silvery gold of a full moon on a hot summer's night,
Marge, whose exquisiteness it had been agony not to touch, hold, crush,
raven. They were all there: Anne, Louise, Ellen, Charlotte, Gwen, Dot,
Jill, Hermina, Belle, Sybil.... All those rewards ironic experience
informed him belatedly he could have known. Grief swelled internally;
he felt the tears flowing backward from his eyes down to his throat and
lungs.

The girls' darting fingers snapped and unsnapped the connections in
rapid rhythm. The pointed plugs were rifle bullets growing out of
living vines rooted in the switchboards. This was his chance to call
Marvin; what if some vital business had come up?

Yet he could not signal to the girls opposite: Connie, whose husband
had contributed to his campaign for councilman, Martha, met at some
dull affair, who had gotten tight with him. He could not ask them
for an impersonal number; he dared not address them familiarly after
realizing how fully he had failed them. The telephone exchange was a
place where communication was impossible.

His steps slowed; he grudged leaving the women even though he could not
reach or touch them, even though he was as helpless to stay as he had
been to seduce. His sadness at the implacability of fate merged with a
gentler, resigned nostalgia.

       *       *       *       *       *

The last pair of switchboards was unoccupied. The Governor pulled a
plug out from each; the vine-wires were straight and inflexible. They
sped through the air, escaping his fingers, growing diagonally upward.
Thinner tendrils sprang out from them at intervals and entwined into
the rungs of a slanting ladder. Lampley put his foot on the lowest; it
was springy but it held his weight without bending too far. He mounted
rapidly.

Halfway up he looked back. The vines had sprouted umbrella-sized
leaves, making a curtain between him and the exchange. He caught
glimpses of blonde, red or brown heads and thought he heard weeping and
laughter. Hummingbirds, moths and dragonflies in brilliant colors lit
on the foliage; the leaves turned scarlet and orange. Gentle winds
rustled them.

The wind on the floor to which he climbed was gray and desolate. Far
across the emptiness he saw a twenty-four motored plane being warmed up
while the waiting passengers cooled cups of coffee in the wash of the
propellers. Equally distant in another direction, an ice-boat turned
in narrow circles. Lightning flashed from dark clouds, thunder rolled
steadily. Lampley walked to a stairway, iron-railed and steep.

Smell indicated that the floor above was used for chickens. Wire cages
reached higher than a man's head, fryers stuck wan beaks through the
openings into feed-troughs, pecking in brainless, suicidal intensity:
tappetty-tappetty-tappetty tap-tap. Women with arms like thighs and
breasts like rumps butchered methodically, wringing necks, cutting
throats, chopping heads off. Spattered with blood, the women wiped
their eyes with their great forearms, tossing sweaty hair out of their
faces, joking, smearing entrails on their filthy aprons. The Governor
hastily climbed the shallow wooden stairs ahead.

He was panting a little when he reached the sculptors' studio. Statues
towered in impassive marble, porphyry, onyx, granite: men and women,
gods and goddesses, dinosaurs, scorpions, dolphins, tortoises, dryads,
satyrs, soaring abstractions--multiplaned figures, spheres, subtly
out-of-round, curves and ovals in inescapable relationships. He put
his hand against the cold stone; the aloof, remote smoothness reassured
him.

Obscured--not hidden, but certainly not put out for all to see--were
groups in wood, soapstone, chalk, jade, concrete, glass, bone.
Mermaids, centaurs, demons, incubi, basilisks, cockatrices, foetuses,
were carved in meticulous detail. Monsters, congenitally malformed,
crouched next to cyclops, multi-limbed children, hermaphrodites, twins
joined chest to chest, mouthless, earless, armless creatures. He
shuddered away from them, turned back to the nobler creations; always
his eye found another collection of horror for him to gaze at.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was reluctant to leave this place of quietness and aspiration, of
fascinating disgust. The stairway leading up was a continuance. The
flight was of chalcedony, wide, sweeping upward in the grand manner,
curving outward at the base and dividing in two halfway up; it was
covered with slime which bubbled and stank in decay.

He trod fastidiously through the contamination, wiping his feet free
of the clinging rot at the top. A bespectacled ape with a stethoscope
dangling from the pocket of his white jacket seized Lampley's hand, dug
his fingers into the wrist, feeling for the pulse with an unbreakable
grip. The jacket was his only garment; it was not quite long enough to
cover his genitals.

"Get a stretcher, Nurse," the ape called over his shoulder. He stood on
tiptoe to peer first into the Governor's right eye, and then the left,
holding the lids open gently.

"There's nothing wrong with me," protested Lampley.

"Let's hope not," murmured the ape soothingly. "We'll soon find out."

Another ape in white cap and starched white skirts pedaled with bare
feet a bicycle attached to a gurney. "Just get on this," said the
ape-doctor.

"I can walk," contended Lampley.

"We have our rules," insisted the ape-doctor firmly but not
unpleasantly. "If you are cooperative it will be easier all around."

The ape-nurse smiled at the Governor, opening her mouth wide to show
her fangs. "You can sit, you know; you don't have to lie down."

Lampley seated himself on the edge of the gurney. The ape-nurse
pedalled vigorously; the doctor trotted alongside, consulting the
bulbous watch on his furry arm. The dial had no hands, numerals or
glass, only buttons marked, HOT, RUTTING, COLD, BANANA, JAVA, RESET. "I
don't understand," said Lampley.

"Don't worry," advised the doctor. "None of us understand. Just
remember there's nothing to worry about. We're here only to help you."

"But I don't need help."

The two apes exchanged significant glances and the nurse picked a
flea off the doctor's thigh. "That's what they all say," commented
the doctor pityingly. "It's nothing to be ashamed of. The tempo of
uncivilized life is such it's a wonder more don't break under it."

"I--" began the Governor, and stopped. He could deny nothing.

They entered a white-floored room shaped like a tepee, with white walls
leaning together, coming to a point at an incandescent light above.
The nurse pedalled the gurney under the cone and rested her head on
her arms. Five other ape-doctors came through the shining walls which
closed unbroken behind them. "Good-day, Doctor," they greeted in unison.

"Good-day, Doctor," replied the ape-doctor. "We have a most
uninteresting case here."

A short ape plucked at his lower lip and grinned at the Governor.
"Lucky you," he wheezed in a stage whisper. "He never discharges the
interesting ones."

The other apes laughed; even the head doctor had trouble suppressing
his smile. "Now, gentle-pithecanthropes," he said, "I'd like to have
your opinions."

       *       *       *       *       *

An emaciated ape with a hearing-aid adjusted an ophthalmoscope and
squinted at the Governor. "What's its case-history?" he asked gruffly.

"The usual thing: congenital logophilia, the ordinary childhood
disorders--inflammation of the gizzard, febrile larynx, minor
pyromania, swollen presence--distention of the id, a liberal murmur,
optical inversion, pathological increment of the epidermis, cancer of
the body politic. Nothing to corruscate a clinician."

"Mmmmm," muttered a muscular ape, balancing himself on his knuckles and
shaking his head soberly. "I don't dig these non-arboreal climbers.
Smacks of delusion."

"Now Doctor," admonished the head physician, "are you making a
diagnosis before all the returns are in? We haven't even started to
count the ballots."

"The polls aren't closed yet," the nurse raised her head to point out.
"That's a joke, see?"

A fat ape-doctor removed her cap and stuck it on one side of his head.
"How's his colostrum?"

"What about his colophon?" inquired an old, stooped, graying ape.

"I'm more interested in his collyrium," said the short ape.

"You're a card, Doctor," cried the fat ape and the muscular ape
together.

"Well, well," said the head physician tolerantly. "Fun is fun, but we
must consider the patient."

"Consider the patient," ordered the nurse sternly, retrieving her cap.

"Patients are a virtue, get them while you can, hyster in a woman,
prostate in a man," chanted the thin ape. "Let's get on with it."

"I see definite signs of softening of the hardening," remarked the old
ape.

"Pardon me, Doctor," protested the thin ape, "surely these are classic
symptoms of hardening of the softening."

"Weakening of the perspicates," muttered the muscular ape.

"Inversion of the fluctuates," amended the fat ape.

"Disconvection of the interregnum with complicated indications of
pronobis-paxvobiscum," said the jovial ape, scratching between his
shoulderblades.

"Are we in complete disagreement?" questioned the head doctor
cheerfully.

"Apesolutely, Doctor," confirmed the old consultant. "Apesculapius and
Hippocrapes confirm our capabilities."

The nurse whipped a corncob pipe with a long curved stem from under her
skirts and stuck it in the fat ape's mouth. The muscular ape rubbed two
sticks together till they burst into flame. The thin ape handed over
a pair of goggles. When the glasses were adjusted and the pipe going
to his satisfaction, the fat ape said, "Let the diagnosis continue.
Silence in the court!"

The jovial ape produced a compass and rested it on Lampley's knee.
"Shoot the works, cousin," he commanded.

The nurse sang in a growly voice, "The one shines least, the none
shines nest, but I know where the run shines in your vest--"

"Silence in the court!" repeated the fat ape. "Spin, cousin."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lampley looked down at the compass, saw it had no glass. The points
were marked, FORTH, Forth Forth-Least, Forth Least by Forth,
Forth-Least; Least Forth Least, Forth Least by Least, LEAST; Least
by Mouth Least by Least, Mouth Least; Mouth _Mouth_ Least, Mouth
Least by Mouth, MOUTH; Mouth by Mouth-Best, Mouth-Best by Mouth,
Best Mouth, Mouth-Best by Best, Best-Mouth by Best, BEST; Best by
Forth-Best, Forth-Best by Best, Forth-Best; Forth-Best by Forth, Forth
by Forth-Best, FORTH. The magnetic needle wobbled loosely. Lampley spun
it clumsily. The head physician pressed the studs on his watch. All the
apes crowded in front of the Governor so he could not see the compass.
He knew when the needle stopped, however.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Incredible!" cried the old ape.

"Beautiful!" cried the fat ape.

"Scientific!" cried the jovial ape.

"On the button!" cried the thin ape.

"Haven't seen anything like it since I was an interne!" cried the
muscular ape.

"Very nice," said the head physician. "I take it we are agreed?"

"Unequivocally," said the nurse. "Wow! Let's go!"

"Acute epistemology," said the thin ape tonelessly.

"Chronic voracity," said the fat ape satisfiedly.

"Inflamed igloosensesisty," said the jesting ape happily.

"Dubious proneity," said the old ape solemnly.

"Delusions of humanity," said the muscular ape sadly.

"Delusions of humanity," repeated the whole college mournfully.

"Good, very good indeed," observed the head physician, swinging from a
trapeze and playing a xylophone with his toes. "Hold him temporarily
under observation--"

"No sedation, Doctor," warned the old ape.

"No medication, Doctor," enjoined the muscular ape.

"No inflation, Doctor," suggested the thin ape.

"No castration, Doctor," put in the jovial ape.

"No vindication, Doctor," added the fat ape.

"--pending release and discharge," concluded the head doctor.

"What about infection?" asked the nurse.

"Humanity is not contagious," they all reminded her together.

The practitioners took pomegranates, figs, dates, mangoes and papayas
from their jacket pockets and began munching them earnestly. The nurse
pedalled Lampley through the white walls. "Are you ever lucky," she
informed him chattily. "They might have put you in a strait-jacket and
fed you orally."

"But there's nothing wrong with me."

"Get tired," advised the nurse. "Your needle is stuck." She dismounted.
"Stay where you are," she said when he started to get off too. "So
long, cousin--don't take any wooden colonics."

The gurney moved on by itself, picking up speed. It careened through
dazzling corridors, down ramps, up inclines, through wards, at such a
dizzying pace he could see only the footrails of the beds with their
clipboards of charts. Doors flipped open at his coming and swung back
after him. Finally the gurney stopped so suddenly he slid forward
smoothly onto the floor. When he picked himself up the vehicle was
whizzing around a corner.

He was on a turntable, so nicely fitted into the floor that only a
hairline crack defined it. It revolved slowly past curious scenes
of men and women being cupped and leeched, poulticed with manure or
steaming tripes, packed in snow, offered acrid inhalents or foul
broths; of madmen worshipped or chained and beaten, of babies deformed
for beauty's sake and old people eaten for economy's.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he stepped off the turntable he was in a pleasant but definitely
institutionalized room. An elderly man, derby hatted, blew patiently
into a mute saxophone. A woman with waist-long white hair, lips drawn
in sharply over empty gums, passed an unthreaded shuttle across a loom.
A girl, rocking evenly back and forth, smiled knowingly, secretively.
A bald man with dirty cheeks and smudged scalp, his tongue caught
intently between his teeth, lay prone before a collection of posters,
carefully painting mustaches on the faces of women, blotting out the
faces of men.

At the other end of the room the Governor saw his mother. She was
knitting slowly, diligently. Her arthritis, he thought sympathetically.
He went to her. "Hello Mother." He kissed her cheek.

She finished two more stitches before she spoke. "How are you, Almon?"
she asked placidly. "Isn't this a charming place?"

"You like it here, Mother?"

"Well, it isn't like being in one's own home. And of course they do
serve lambchops without the paper frills," she complained. "I suppose
it's all right, but I must say they look rather naked."

"But you're all right otherwise?"

"My eyes bother me, there's something wrong with the lights. The food
hurts my gums and I'm short of breath and I never can seem to get
comfortable clothes that aren't dowdy. And the newspapers are full of
horrors--"

"Yes, yes," he interrupted impatiently. "But they treat you well,
don't they?"

She put down her knitting. "It depends entirely what you mean by that,
Almon. If your poor father had lived no one would ever have hustled me
around the way they do here."

"Are they rude to you, Mother?"

"They certainly don't act as I should expect persons to act toward a
lady."

"They don't--they don't ... handle you roughly?"

"My dear boy! What a question. They wouldn't _dare_."

He sank into a chair. "That's good. It's all right then."

"I shouldn't go as far as to say that." She resumed her knitting. "They
read my letters," she announced in a loud whisper.

"What letters?" he asked.

"Now Almon, don't pry."

"I'm sorry, Mother. I only thought there might be something I could do
about it."

"Don't be ridiculous, Almon. What could a boy do about such things?"

He was silent, despondent. "Oh, Mother...." He wanted to say that it
was too easy to dismiss all questions as having too many answers or
none at all--to say that the simplest questions, the ones apparently
most irrelevant or meaningless were least susceptible of reply. What he
wanted to say was true enough--or rather, it was true, but not enough.
There were no answers, yet everything was an answer of sorts. "Oh,
Mother," he said, "I don't know."

"Of course you don't," she agreed sharply. "Here, wind my wool for me."

Obediently he picked up the strand lying on her lap and began looping
it around her outstretched hands. The yarn was kinked and lusterless.
"Where do you get your wool?" he asked conversationally.

She cackled. "Now dear boy, don't try to catch me on one as old as
that. I simply will not say from the sheep I count when I'm going to
sleep. I just won't."

"I'm sorry, Mother."

"Are you really? Truly contrite? Genuinely humble?"

"I--I suppose so."

"Oh, suppositions. Theories. Vapors. Hopes. Pooh. Gracious, can't you
wind faster?"

"Something seems to be holding the wool back."

"Nonsense! Oh, see what you've done, you clumsy boy! You're unravelling
my cushion."

"I'm sorry, Mother."

She hurled her knitting in his face. "Take him away," she screamed.
"He's a monster--can't you see?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The other inmates threw up their heads and howled in unison. One
sufferer, naked to the waist, his distorted face set in a dreadful
smile, his hands stiffened into claws, ran into the room and danced
around the Governor. Two women, their streaming hair starched with
dirt, shrieked, "He did it, he did it. He's the peeping tom." A man
shambled in a circle, head down, muttering, "Womb, tomb, boom; boom,
womb, tomb; tomb, boom, womb."

Two sternly expressionless attendants led the Governor to the elevator.
"You are discharged for conduct unbecoming a patient and a gentle."

"But I--"

"If it weren't for this," said one of the attendants coldly, indicating
his white coat, "I'd call you out myself, you cad."

"Don't demean yourself, brother," urged the other attendant. "He'll
suffer now."

A group of orderlies appeared. Those in front beat upon enamel sputum
dishes with hammers used to test reflexes. After them came a number
with dilators, tubes and other objects which they employed as fifes and
flutes. The color-bearer dipped his caduceus to the ground while the
band played the rogues' march. A doctor drew his scalpel and cut the
Governor's buttons from the cuff of his jacket.

The elevator doors opened. The clerk peeled off a white smock and
tossed it out. "Step to the rear of the car please," he urged the
Governor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lampley stumbled in. The elevator swished upward, then ran backward for
interminable miles. It stopped; mechanics with rubber wrenches, paper
hammers and cloth screwdrivers removed the steel doors, replacing them
with a glass one. The clerk moved the control lever; the elevator rose
again.

Once more it was in the shaft lined with porcelain-faced bricks. The
Governor noticed how meticulously they had been set in place, each
fitting so neatly against the next, no course of mortar thicker than
the one above or below.

The clerk left the door open and leaned against it as Lampley wandered
between the rows of grand pianos. The drops from the stalactites
tinkled as monotonously as before on the exposed strings of the
instruments. Plink plink, plink plink, plink plunk. It seemed to
him--he was by no means sure--that on his first visit the pianos had
all been identical. Now they were rosewood, mahogany, maple, ebony.
Some were enamelled a startling white, one gleamed in dull silver,
the varnish on another sparkled with crushed glass. He paused before
a grand of such modest finish and unobtrusive wood that it commanded
instant attention among more flamboyant peers. The Governor sat down
before it, striking a key with his middle finger. Plink. What a work
is man, he thought; I will my finger to move and it moves--what
incomparable engineering! Plink. He had forgotten even how to play a
scale; the stalactites could do as well or better. Plink plink, plink
plunk.

In imagination he played the piano with perfect mastery, without
effort, without barrier between conception and performance. The
exquisite music flowed from his fingers and laved the air. His heart
burst with exaltation. The power of his playing infected all the nearby
pianos; they exploded into the same melody.

Plink plink. Miss Brewster would have said primly, If that was your
ambition, you should have practiced. Hours and hours and hours every
day. Plink plink. And then Miss Brewster would not have smacked his
hands and when he thought of her when he was bigger he wouldn't
have.... Plink plunk. A stupid fancy.

He got up impatiently. Could that be the unicorn lurking in the
shadows? He walked slowly toward it. The creature showed no fear of
him, made no attempt to run away. Trembling a little, Lampley put out
his hand. The unicorn nuzzled his palm. Lampley touched the golden
horn, ran his fingers through the foamy mane. The unicorn looked at him
with its blue eyes; Lampley felt infinitely rewarded.

The unicorn was smaller than he had thought--as small as a pony. They
walked together between the pianos, the beast breathing gently, the man
reassuring himself of affection by rubbing the soft coat. All the pain
of struggle began slowly to drain from his body; he knew he could be
content to stay here.

Only when they were almost at the elevator did the unicorn throw up his
head, toss his mane and gallop off. The Governor turned to pursue but
the clerk, still leaning in the open door, stopped him. "It's no use,"
he called, not unkindly. "You couldn't catch him unless he wanted you
to."

"But he ..." began Lampley.

"A whim," said the clerk. "They're all alike."

Sadly he entered the elevator. It was only as the door was closing he
realized the plinking from the stalactites had stopped as he touched
the unicorn.




                               CHAPTER 8


The elevator slid upward steadily through the white-tiled shaft.
Lampley, slowly recovering his calm after the loss of the unicorn,
caught glimpses of the activities in the various sub-basements. Men
were building a ship in one, laying the keel, riveting the ribs,
welding the plates. Higher, dynamos of all sizes were attended by
midgets who climbed and clung like flies. On the next floor hundreds
of seamstresses in grecian robes cut and sewed balloons, twisted
silk threads into heavy ropes, wove rush baskets and attached them
to the flaccid bags; on another he saw a congregation of worshippers
at prayer. There was a sub-basement that was a library, one which
was a toy factory, one where alchemists turned waste into gold.
There was a bakery, an automobile assembly, an iron foundry, a
chemical laboratory, a college, a mortuary. They rose through
moving picture stages, distilleries, warehouses, mill-wrights,
armorers, perfume-makers, silversmiths, glass-blowers, gem-cutters,
machine-shops, art galleries, a mint, lumber-yard, stoveworks.

Then came a series of vacant floors: bleak, void, stale. The elevator
moved much more slowly now, as though dragged down by the emptiness,
pulled back, hampered by the blankness through which it was passing.

"About this fellow," said the clerk abruptly.

"What fellow?" parried the Governor. But he knew.

The clerk pulled out a plastic mask and slipped it over his face. It
was a replica of his own features, subtly altered, so that the Governor
was filled with sick terror at the sight of mouth, nose, cheeks, eyes,
superimposed on those which differed only enough to be totally alien.
The clerk stopped the elevator, opened the door. Walls of rough stone
towered on all sides. The Governor held back until the clerk's steady
stare forced him out onto the cracked, uneven pavement. There was a
sweetish, sickening, vaguely familiar smell all around.

The clerk rubbed his hands together and then over Lampley's arm in a
gesture of appraisal and possession. To his disgust the Governor saw
the fabric of his jacket crumble and dissolve. His jacket and the shirt
beneath, leaving his skin and flesh bare and vulnerable. The touch of
the fingers was loathsome but he was unable to draw away from it. The
clerk brought his face close, so that Lampley saw where the mouth of
the mask, the eyeholes and nostrils failed to match those beneath.

"This man, this convict, this felon. You couldn't find it in you to
reprieve him?"

"He had a fair trial," mumbled Lampley.

"A fair trial," repeated the clerk. "The jurors were gods, the judge
was justice incarnate?"

"The judge was properly assigned; the jurors were members of a
qualified panel."

"Your prerogative...?"

"My prerogative is to temper justice with mercy."

"And you were unable?"

"He murdered his father. He strangled him, he smothered him with a
pillow, he stabbed him in the heart, he poisoned him, he shot him with
a pistol; he killed his mother."

"Are you sure?" asked the clerk, puffing out the cheeks of his mask.

"There were witnesses, there was circumstantial evidence, he confessed.
He clubbed his mother to death, he cut her throat, he held her under
water till she died."

"Ah," sighed the clerk. "Ah.... Then no reprieve was possible?"

"No reprieve was possible," replied the Governor firmly.

"So be it," said the clerk.

Two pale men leapt from their hiding-place and bound Lampley's hands
behind him. They led him through an archway into a courtyard. A
masked executioner came forward and knelt at his feet. "I ask your
forgiveness, noble sir, for what I am about. The deed is not mine, I am
but a servitor."

The two pressed him toward the block and forced his head low. The
semicircular hollow was cunningly contrived to fit any neck. The long
gashes in the wood pulled and sucked at his throat. The executioner
raised his ax and brought it down. Lampley's head rolled in the sawdust
beyond the scaffold.

The two seized him and bound his arms. From a distance he heard the
chaplain's breaking voice. They hustled him between the stone walls
and dragged him up the gallows' steps. The hood was dropped over his
head, then the rope. He felt the hardness of the knot against his left
ear. There was no spittle in his mouth. They pushed his legs firmly
into place over the trap. He heard the snick of the knife as it cut the
cords. He swung in a narrowing circle.

They wrapped the thin cord deftly round and round his body, pinioning
his arms cruelly to his sides. They slid him down the incline beneath
the guillotine. When he was suitably in place the blade descended
swiftly.

They seated him in the chair and strapped the electrodes to his leg
and head. They pushed him into the sealed chamber and watched through
greedy slits while the cyanide pellets were released. They tied the
bandage over his eyes and stepped back just before the fusilade.

He lay broken on the rough stones. He remembered the touch of the
golden horn and began breathing again. He remembered the island under
the earth and his heart resumed beating. He remembered the young girl
in the hotel and he could see and hear.

       *       *       *       *       *

He rose slowly and viewed his bodies after their agonies. He walked
past the bullet-chipped wall, the gas-chamber, electric chair,
guillotine, gallows. His feet scuffed the bloody sawdust by the
headsman's block.

The elevator stood empty and unattended. He went into the car, the door
closed behind him and the car shot up. Again it slowed as it passed the
darkened tiles in the upper reaches of the sub-basements, so that it
was once more moving sluggishly as the lobby and the hall above came in
sight. It stopped amid the elegance of the third floor, and the doors
opened of themselves.

The elegance had become shabby beyond restoration. The thick carpet was
worn to the threads. Woodwork and panelling no longer contrasted, they
were the same uniform color of age. The chairs and sofas were ripped
and tattered, their stuffing protruded like ruptures. The doll was
in the same place and position; a pendulous belly and two elongated
breasts had been sewed on with coarse stitches.

The iron railing around the quadrangle leaned outward; some of the
balusters were missing. The concourse below was gone; he looked down on
the dingy lobby, past the visible portion of the second floor hiding
the reception desk. He turned away; the doors which had borne the
esoteric numerals were blank, their panels warped and sagging.

He searched for the wide staircase to the second floor. His orientation
had changed, he turned left instead of right, or right instead of left.
In lieu of the grand flight he came upon a mean descent, twisting every
few steps. The boards creaked and quivered under his weight.

His room was that of the first door he opened. His handbag rested on
the foot of the bed, the wax figures of the bride and groom stood
stiffly in the cloudy glass bell. Lampley tarried before the mirror,
adjusting his sleeves, assuring himself there was neither lint nor soil
on his jacket. He picked up his bag and gave a conventional last glance
around, though he knew he had brought nothing more into the room.

He shut the door and tried the handle; it did not turn. Yet surely it
had been closed before he went in to retrieve his bag? All the doors on
the hall were shut, shut and locked and untenanted, their invitation
withdrawn. He reached the narrow stairs. From these there was no
landing halfway down, nor did they lead to the lobby. They ended at a
solid door with a handle instead of a knob. He pressed the latch down
doubtfully, anxious to be out of this blind end, unwilling to go back
up and start down again.

The refrigerator room which had been so cold was now warm and stuffy.
There was no igloo. The game and fish were gone, the brine barrels were
tipped over, gaping unconcernedly. They gave out no smell save that of
old wood. The sawdust had weathered. Most of the meat hooks were empty;
from a few hung the bare skeletons of beeves and sheep and swine, the
surface of their bones dry, cracked with long, thin crevices, crossed
with fine hairlines. He recognized the buffalo because of the peculiar
shape of the skull and horns lying on the floor below the carcass.

       *       *       *       *       *

He pushed open the massive door to the kitchen. The old man was carving
a set of chessmen out of bone; several finished pieces, rooks, knights
and a queen stood in a row before him. In his thick fingers the other
queen was taking recognizable shape. All had the same distortion as
the plaster figures in the wall. He looked up at Lampley without
interrupting his work. "A hard time, hay?"

The Governor nodded. The old man jerked a thumb over his shoulder.
Lampley followed its direction into the eating room. The idiot was
trying to spoon soup into his mouth, spilling most of it, sputtering
the rest into slimy bubbles. The clerk, his eyes closed, had one leg
hooked over the corner of the table. The woman smiled at him, showing
the gold tooth. There was no sign of the girl. Lampley sat down in the
old man's place.

The clerk's eyes opened; the mask was gone. He pushed a hard crust of
bread across the table. Lampley picked it up and turned it over in his
fingers. "I'm going," he announced to them.

The clerk yawned. "I'd be afraid myself," he confessed.

"Afraid of what?" asked the Governor.

The clerk shrugged. "So much," he said hazily. "Everything." He smiled
doubtfully.

"There's nothing to be afraid of," said the Governor boldly.

The clerk shook his head and left the room. The idiot gurgled and
sputtered over his soup. Lampley reached for the corner of the napkin
tied around his neck and wiped the drooling mouth. He took the stale
crust and broke it into the soup. When the bits were soaked he used the
spoon to feed them slowly to his son.

"It's no use," said the woman. "You can't teach him."

"I wasn't trying--" began Lampley, and let it go. "Where is your
sister?"

She wrinkled her forehead. "Sister?"

He had asked the girl if she were this woman's daughter; she is my
sister, she had said, and then something horrible--what?--happened. He
could not be mistaken. "The girl who was here."

"I was the only girl here. There was no other. There never was another."

He looked at her searchingly; her face showed no disingenuousness. He
finished feeding the defective and wiped his face again. He got up and
went over to the woman. She reached out her hand to touch his. He bent
and kissed her. Then he kissed his son.

In the lobby the clerk was behind the desk, idly searching through the
empty pigeonholes. "Nothing for you," he said without turning around.

The Governor went through the entrance and down the steps into the
afternoon sunlight. When he came to his car he reached in his pocket
for the keys. His hand touched his watch. He pulled it out and saw it
was running, the sweep-second hand revolving inexorably. He slipped it
on his wrist and unlocked the car door.

Before getting in he glanced up and down the street and back at the
hotel. He had never seen it or the town at any time in his life.


                                THE END
